# Public Services Responsibility of the Library Director Confidentiality of Library Records

The Library Director shall carry forward the policies, goals and objectives adopted by the Board and shall recommend policies and formulate procedures which, in the Director's opinion, will promote the efficiency of the Library in its services to the residents of the District.

(Ref: By-Laws VII3)

The Library specifically recognizes any document, record, or other method of storing information retained, received, or generated by the Library that identifies a person or persons having requested, used, or borrowed library material to be confidential. The Library shall not divulge such information to anyone other than the borrower. Such records shall not be made available to any agency of state, federal, or local government except pursuant to such process, order, or subpoena as may be authorized under the authority of, and pursuant to, federal, state, or local law relating to civil, criminal, or administrative discovery procedures or legislative investigatory power. The Library shall resist the issuance or enforcement of any such process, order, or subpoena until such time as a proper showing of good cause has been made in a court of competent jurisdiction.

Board Policy 105 (Adopted 11-88/Amended 8-99)

## 105.01 Confidentiality of Email Lists and Email Sharing

The Library maintains a list of individual email addresses gathered in various ways, including when a library patron applies for a card and when someone makes a reservation for an event via email. The Library will use email addresses gathered to communicate back to the patron to inform about upcoming events, activities and speakers. The Library will not share email address information with outside organizations. The only exception to this procedure will be in cases where an individual has clearly consented (via a Library information form or other written communication with the Library) that their email information can be shared with a specific organization(s).

Administrative Procedure 105.01 (Adopted 10-07)
