# Public Service Responsibility of the Library Director

The Library Director shall carry forward the policies, goals and objectives adopted by the Board and shall recommend policies and formulate procedures which, in the Director's opinion, will promote the efficiency of the Library in its services to the residents of the District.

Board Policy 106 (Ref: By-Laws VII.3/Adopted 11-88)

## 106.01. Circulation/Registration Manual

The Director of Access Services, working with system staff, administration and committees, shall be responsible for developing, monitoring and maintaining a Circulation/Registration Manual which will contain basic information, regulations, guidelines and procedures for the registration of borrowers and the conditions of loan for all Library materials. Proposed changes in the manual shall be submitted to Management Group and the Library Director for consideration and action.

Administrative Procedure 106.01 (Adopted 11-89)

## 106.02. Reference Service, Guidelines and Procedures

The Reference Services Coordinator, working with system staff, administration and committees shall be responsible for developing, monitoring and maintaining Reference Service Guidelines and Procedures which will contain basic information, regulations, guidelines and procedures for the public use of the reference collection and the provision of reference services. Proposed changes in the guidelines and procedures shall be submitted to Management Group and the Library Director for consideration and action.

Administrative Procedure 106.02 (Adopted 11-89)

## 106.03. Americans with Disability Act compliance Procedures

The ADA Access Coordinator, working with the system staff, administration and committees, shall be responsible for coordinating ADA compliance efforts for the Library, including the investigation of complaints alleging any action prohibited by the U.S. Department of Justice regulations implementing Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act. All complaints shall be addressed to the attention of the ADA Coordinator who will conduct an informal investigation to resolve each complaint in a prompt and equitable manner and submit a written report to the Library Director. Any complaints not resolved by the ADA Coordinator may be submitted to the Library Director for resolution. The following policies and practices are designed to further insure the full participation of individuals with disabilities in the Library's programs, activities and services:

1. When viewed in their entirety, all Library programs, services and activities (including public meetings) shall provide for the full participation of all individuals, including those with disabilities and shall not, because of physical or other barriers, exclude or limit such individuals from full participation.
2. Library employees will make every effort to ensure that communications with customers, program participants and members of the public with disabilities are as effective as communication with non-disabled people.
3. Appropriate auxiliary aids and services, or readers, interpreters or reading devices will be furnished where necessary and economically feasible to afford individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to participate in Library programs, services or activities, including but not limited to the following:(a) readers for individuals with visual impairments;(b) interpreters or other alternative communications measures (as appropriate) for individuals with hearing impairments; and(c) transcribers for individuals with manual impairments.
4. Decisions as to whether the furnishing of auxiliary aids, services or devices may fundamentally alter the nature of a Library program, service or activity or a decision that an undue financial or administrative burden will be imposed by Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act will be made properly and expeditiously by the Library Director.
5. All equipment used as a part of the Library's programs, services or activities, shall be maintained in operable working order and usable by individuals with disabilities, particularly individuals with hearing, visual, and manual impairments.

Administrative Procedure 106.04 (Adopted 12-94)
