---
id: 031
title: TRAVEL BY MEMBERS OF THE BOARD
sidebar_label: 031. TRAVEL BY MEMBERS OF THE BOARD
---

The Library Board will approve travel of members for purposes stated below and provide reimbursement for expenses in accordance with procedures adopted from time to time.

## In-District Travel 
Members of the Board may be allowed mileage at rates in effect for the Library District at the time of the travel for in-district travel to and from:
1. Regular and special meetings of the Board.
2. Scheduled meetings of committees of the Board which members attend.
3. Special assignments or duties having prior Board approval.
4. Other official business.

---
## Out-of-District Travel
The Library Board considers it necessary and appropriate that members of the Board:
1. Attend meetings sponsored by Library associations and by other organizations interested in finding solutions to the challenges facing library districts throughout the country.
2. Attend governmental and other conferences dealing with subjects important to the operation of the Library District.

---
## Approval 
All out-of-district travel for which reimbursement (other than mileage or meal expense) is provided must be approved in advance by a majority vote of the Board.

---
## Reimbursement/Allowance Standards
The following allowance standards shall prevail for out-of-district travel:
1. **Transportation.** Air fare shall be allowed for the lowest price service available for the flight. All costs of travel to and from the airport and kneeling point or hotel may be claimed as transportation expense. Reimbursement for travel by car will be allowed to one member per car at the prevailing mileage rate or Economy air fare, whichever is less. Allowance for travel by car shall be made on the basis of joint use of the same car whenever possible.
2. **Reimbursement for accommodations shall be made on the basis of actual receipts.** When two or more members share a room, full allowances may be made to one member or a proportionate allowance to each as requested. When a Board member's spouse or other family member(s) share a room, allowance shall be approved at the establishment's rate for a single room, as evidenced by an official receipt showing payment at such rate.
3. **Meals.** Reimbursement or allowance for meals shall be for the exact amount expended as documented by receipt for amounts in excess of $25.00 or travel log. A Board member is authorized to include meals for a guest(s) who can serve the interest of the District. When this provision is used, the name(s) of the guest(s), a receipt for the expenditure, and a statement of the subject matter covered shall be included in the reimbursement request.
4. **Registration Fees.** Registration fees may be paid in advance by the Library directly to the organization sponsoring the activity, or actual registration fees will be reimbursed upon provision of a paid receipt.
5. **Miscellaneous Expenses.** Miscellaneous on-site expenses such as transportation, tips, and gratuities will be allowed up to a maximum of $25.00 per day exclusive of ground transportation for arrival and departure days as itemized on the travel report.

---

**_Board Policy 031 (Adopted 6 89/Rev. 12-90)_**