# 301 General Employement Policy

A goal of the Kansas City Public Library is to select, assemble and aid in the development of the most competent personnel to perform and support the service program of the Library. The Library shall attempt to recruit and hire the most qualified applicants for any vacant position. Whenever possible, serious effort will be made to fill vacant positions from within the existing staff. This effort will be supported through the Library's staff development program, aimed at upgrading employee skills and knowledge for future career growth.

---

Board Policy 301 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-89)

---

## 301.01. Diversity/Equal Employment Opportunity

The Kansas City Public Library is committed through its practices, programs, collections, and services creating and fostering an environment of equity, non-discrimination, and pluralism, grounded in respect and appreciation. All individuals are welcome regardless of race, color, age, national origin, sex, religion, disability, sexual orientation, gender status or identity, marital status, or political affiliation. By fostering an atmosphere of diversity and inclusion, we will continue to be leaders in public discourse, address current and future community needs, and inspire a community of readers.

The Kansas City Public Library provides equal employment opportunity to all applicants for employment and all employees in accordance with the law.

1. The Library strictly prohibits any unlawful discrimination against applicants or employees because of their race, color, creed, religion, sexual orientation, gender status or identity, age, national origin, ancestry, disability, or Vietnam-era or disabled veteran status.
2. Employment decisions are made on the basis of bona fide occupational qualifications such as, experience, education, demonstrated performance and competency.
3. The Library's Human Resources Director serves as the EEO Coordinator and is responsible for monitoring and revising Library diversity efforts.
4. The Library also strictly prohibits in accordance with the law any harassment on the basis of sex. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, other oral and written communication or physical contact of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; (2) submission to, or rejection of, such conduct by an employee is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
5. If an employee believes that he or she has been subject to treatment in violation of this Equal Employment Opportunity Policy, or if an employee has information relating to the treatment of a fellow employee and possible violation of this policy, the employee should immediately report it to any supervisor, manager, officer or, if the employee prefers, the Human Resources Director. A dedicated voice mail box 816.701.3533 in the Human Resources Department is available for employees to use to report harassment. There will be no retaliation against an employee for reporting unlawful discrimination or harassment. When possible and at the employee's request, the matter will remain confidential. Should a supervisor witness or suspect that a violation of the EEO policy has occurred whether in their immediate work area or not, it must be reported and investigated.
6. All employees, including the complainant and the respondent, are required to cooperate with an investigation of harassment. Persons who are asked to provide testimony are expected to cooperate fully and truthfully and to maintain the confidentiality of the investigation. Employees who fail to cooperate or who provide false testimony may be subject to disciplinary action ranging from a written warning to termination.
7. All employees are required to accept responsibility for maintaining the Library free of unlawful discrimination or harassment. The Library will not tolerate unlawful discrimination or harassment against employees or applicants for employment.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.01 (Adopted 4-89/Rev. 12-02/Rev. 7-16)

---

## 301.012. Americans with Disabilities Act Statement

THE KANSAS CITY PUBLIC LIBRARY is committed to complying with all applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). It is the Library's policy not to discriminate against any qualified employee or applicant with regard to any terms or conditions of employment because of such individual's disability or perceived disability so long as the employee can perform the essential functions of the job. Consistent with this policy of nondiscrimination, the Library will provide reasonable accommodations to a qualified individual with a disability, as defined by the ADA, who has made the Library aware of his or her disability, provided that such accommodation does not constitute an undue hardship on the Library.

Employees with a disability who believe they need a reasonable accommodation to perform the essential functions of their job should contact the Human Resources Department. THE KANSAS CITY PUBLIC LIBRARY encourages individuals with disabilities to come forward and request reasonable accommodation.

On receipt of an accommodation request, the Human Resources Department and the employee’s manager will meet with the employee to discuss and identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and the potential accommodation that THE KANSAS CITY PUBLIC LIBRARY might make to help overcome those limitations.

THE KANSAS CITY PUBLIC LIBRARY will determine the feasibility of the requested accommodation considering various factors, including, but not limited to the nature and cost of the accommodation, THE KANSAS CITY PUBLIC Library’s overall financial resources, and the impact on operations, including its impact on the ability of other employees to perform their duties, and on THE KANSAS CITY PUBLIC Library’s ability to conduct business. The Library will inform the employee of its decision on the accommodation request or on how to make the accommodation. If the accommodation request is denied, employees will be advised of their right to appeal the decision by submitting a written statement explaining the reasons for the request to the Library Director. If the request on appeal is denied, that decision is final.

An employee or job applicant who has questions regarding this policy or believes that he or she has been discriminated against based on a disability should notify the Human Resources Department. All such inquiries or complaints will be treated as confidential to the extent permissible by law.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.012 (Adopted 5-18)

---

## 301.02. Recruitment and Posting of Vacancies

This procedure is currently under revision.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.02 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 301.03. Interviewing and Selection Process

For clerical, para-professional and specific part-time positions, final applicants will be interviewed by the immediate supervisor. For professional level positions and others as may be deemed necessary, applicants will be interviewed by a selection committee and, in appropriate situations, the Library Director. Applicants will receive a verbal summary of the job; be advised of the hiring salary range and benefits; receive information on the Library's performance evaluation system; and be advised of Library policies related to collecting references, pre-employment data, and background checks when required.

All appointments are subject to the approval of the Library Director.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.03 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 12-01)

---

## 301.04. Appointment

The general process for making a hiring decision requires the approval of the hiring supervisor or manager, Human Resources and the appropriate Deputy Director and Director.

1. Completed tax forms, I-9 forms, EEO/Veteran information and related information found in new hire packets are to be forwarded to Human Resources with a completed Personnel/Payroll Data Base Change Notice form.
2. An interview form and copies of all applications considered are to be returned to Human Resources. Human Resources will forward the hiring information to the Director for final approval.
3. All applicants will be notified by either Human Resources or the selecting supervisor of the outcome. Following the appointee's acceptance of the position and the notification of all unsuccessful applicants, the hiring supervisor will announce the appointment via email or in the staff newsletter.
4. All appointees shall receive a written confirmation of the employment agreement including effective date of employment, position classification, beginning salary rate (hourly or semi-monthly), fringe benefits information if applicable, and a job description.
5. New employees may start at any time convenient for the Library and the employee. Employee changes in classification and salary which accompany an employee transfer, promotion, or upgrade will normally become effective at the beginning of a pay period and when the staff member actually assumes full responsibility for the new position.
6. All new employees should complete the necessary withholding and insurance forms and receive initial orientation as a library employee on their first day of work. Attendance at Library New Employee Orientation should occur the first month of employment. Detailed orientation and training of all new employees are the responsibility of the appropriate department head or supervisor.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.04 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 301.05. Employment Policy Disclaimer

Nothing contained in this manual creates any form of employment contract, and the Library reserves the right to interpret, amend, modify, cancel or withdraw any or all sections or provisions of this manual at any time. Any such modification or cancellation shall become effective on the date announced by written notice, Intranet posting, or upon reissue of the manual or sections thereof.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.05 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 301.06. Employment Qualifications

The terms "equivalent" or "equivalent combination of education and experience" will be determined by the hiring supervisor, Deputy Director and Human Resources with each opening. Decisions will be based on the needs and specifics of the job at the time of the opening and will be determined prior to the interviewing process.

---

Administrative Procedure 301.06 (Adopted 9-96)

---
[<< 200 Collection Development](/policies/200-collection-development/) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [302 Nepotism >>](/policies/300-personnel-staff/302.md)
--- | --- | ---
