# 303 Authorization to Employ and Discharge Staff

The Library Director, or his/her designee, shall be authorized to employ, in the name of the Board of Trustees, all staff and employees of the Library and to discharge same, subject to the right of any staff member or employee to request and receive a hearing pertaining to said discharge.

---

Board Policy 303 (Ref.: By Laws VII. 3./Adopted 11-88/Rev. 4-03)

---

## 303.01. Full-Time Employees

Full-time library employees are those staff members who work 40 hours per week. Full-time employees who work in departments which operate more than 45 hours per week may have work schedules that include evenings and/or weekend assignments as a part of their regularly scheduled 40 hour work week. Responsibility for scheduling shall rest with the department head or his/her designee.

All regular full-time employees are obligated by state law to participate in the retirement plan. Full-time employees are also eligible for a fringe benefit package designed for them and provided by the Library system.

---

Administrative Procedure 303.01 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-99/Rev. 1-15)

---

## 303.011. Part-Time Employees

Part-time library employees are those staff members who work a regular schedule of less than 30 hours of work per week. Part-time employees are prohibited from having a 25 hour schedule with a regular schedule of five days per week at five hours or more each day.

Part-time employees are ineligible to participate in the retirement plan unless otherwise governed by the retirement plan. They are paid on an hourly basis. Part-time employees are also eligible for fringe benefits specifically designed for part-time staff and provided by the library system.

---

Administrative Procedure 303.011 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 12-01/Rev. 1-15)

---

## 303.012. Temporary Employees

On occasion, the Library requires the services of temporary staff, both full-time and part-time:

1. Temporary positions are designed to meet the Library's needs for project-related assistance. Selection and appointment to these positions usually follows and adheres to standard Library procedures, employment provisions or guidelines as established by current state and federal legislation.
2. On occasion, in consultation with the HR director and with approval by the Library Director, a temporary position may be filled using alternative methods when deemed in the best interest of the Library.
3. Employees filling temporary positions may be offered the opportunity to renew their employment based on the status of individual projects, the availability of funding and their supervisor's evaluation of the work being performed.
4. Temporary employees are paid in accordance with prescribed Library practices. Full-time temporary employees are eligible for participation in all benefits available for regular status full-time employees except the School District Retirement Program. In the event that a temporary employee is hired for a regular full-time position with the Library, participation in the retirement program is mandatory. Part-time temporary employees are eligible for all library benefits available for part-time staff. In addition, full-time temporary employees are paid for all holidays when the Library is closed.
5. Temporary employees are subject to the conditions of a "Temporary Position Work Agreement" prior to beginning employment in any temporary position.
6. Temporary employees are eligible for hire or rehire to other temporary or regular positions, contingent upon their supervisor's evaluation of their work performance, of which they are subject to the same performance standards as regular employees.

---

Administrative Procedure 303.012 (Adopted 8-91/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 303.02. Substitutes

Substitutes are paid staff who are assigned on an on-call basis to either replace other paid staff who are absent or to perform special temporary assignments that are authorized by the Library Director or his/her designee.

- All substitutes are paid at the currently budgeted hourly rate for the substitute classification. Regular part-time employees who also work as substitutes will earn the substitute rate for the hours worked as a substitute unless working extra hours in their home department.
- Substitutes will receive at least four to eight hours of paid in-service training for the type of assignments they are expected to perform.
- Substitutes may be asked to work at Central or any branch. They will be expected to perform duties as assigned by the person in charge of the department or branch to which they report. They may be used for temporary short-term projects or rush periods of predictable duration, but are not to be used as regular part-time employees. Under normal circumstances they will be assigned no more than twenty-nine hours per week.
  Schedules
- The need for substitutes is unpredictable. Substitutes will be scheduled as far in advance as possible, but may be requested to report immediately in cases of illness or emergencies. It is understood that substitutes, by the nature of their position, may refuse an assignment. They may also have long periods when no requests for services are made.
- A substitute’s scheduled time can be canceled or shift reduced if a supervisor determines the hours are no longer needed.
- An active substitute list will be maintained by the substitute supervisor. Substitutes may be removed from the active substitute list and payroll if they do not work within any 6 month period of time, do not keep a phone number active, do not regularly respond to offers of assignments, or are absent from or tardy for any assignment twice in any three month period of time. Exceptions can be made for any ongoing medical needs.

---

Administrative Procedure 303.02 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 1-15/Rev.7-16)

---

## 303.03. Volunteers

This policy is under revision.

---

Administrative Procedure 303.03 (Adopted 8-85)

---
[<< 302 Nepotism](/policies/300-personnel-staff/302.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [304 Classification Plan >>](/policies/300-personnel-staff/304.md)
--- | --- | ---
