# 306 Reduction in Force

Reduction in force occurs when it is impossible or infeasible to continue personnel strength at its existing level. The library administration shall develop appropriate procedures to maintain as high a level of library service as possible and to be fair to all members of the staff whenever a reduction in force becomes necessary.

---

Board Policy 306 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-89)

---

## 306.01. Staff Reduction/Reorganization

Reorganization of library operations will be the basis for determining which staff members will be retained, displaced or released in each unit of the organization such as branch services or departments. If a job is eliminated, the displaced employee must be transferred or released.

An employee to be displaced may:

1. Be assigned to a position in the same classification provided she/he meets both the qualifications and seniority requirements.
2. Be assigned to a position in a lower classification provided she/he meets both the qualifications and seniority requirements.
3. Be assigned to a part-time position for which he or she meets both the qualifications and seniority requirements.
4. Qualify for, but refuse to accept, an assignment. If this action is taken, it will be construed as a resignation.
5. Be released because of lower seniority than incumbents in any remaining positions.
6. Retain their higher salary for six months after moving to a lower paying position. After six months, if the salary was above the new range and level, it will be adjusted, not to exceed the top of the classification and assigned step, as determined by the Library Director, Deputy Director or Human Resources.

---

## 306.02. Procedures to Implement Reduction in Force Policy

Should a reduction in force be necessary, supervisors will give as much notice as possible (usually 60 calendar days or more) to individual staff members, and supervisors and Human Resources will provide staff with personnel policies and procedures regarding the reduction.

If staff reduction is required, the Library Administration will determine whether displaced employees meet the qualifications of the job description for specific remaining positions. The Administration will also select the positions for which displaced employees are thought to be best qualified. Determination of qualifications will be based on training, experience and demonstrated ability.

The displaced employee may accept a new assignment or refuse by resigning. If the employee resigns, he or she may become eligible for unemployment benefits. Eligibility will be determined by the appropriate office of the Division of Employment Security.

Employees to be released because of their failure to meet the qualifications and seniority requirements for any position in the system, will be given 60 calendar days' notice or the equivalent in notice pay. Job counseling assistance will be offered whenever practical to help displaced workers seek other employment. Local employment resources will be notified, when appropriate, of upcoming reductions.

---

Administrative Procedure 306.02 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 306.03. Reduction in Classification

As circumstances change, it may become necessary to increase or decrease the number of employees assigned to any given unit of the Library. These circumstances may involve a shift in the workload or demand for service.

If the duties of a position are significantly reduced, either in quantity or level of responsibility, the position may be reduced to a lower classification.

If a position is reduced, the incumbent will continue to be paid at the same rate as previously for a period of six months. After that, the employee's salary will be adjusted not to exceed the top of the classification as determined by the Library Director, Deputy Director and Human Resources.

If the incumbent of a reduced position is transferred to another position, he or she will be evaluated at the end of the six months on the new job to see if the new duties are being satisfactorily performed. If they are not, every effort will be made to place the staff member appropriately before resorting to termination of employment.

Special consideration may be given to staff who have been employed by the Kansas City Public Library for twenty-five or more years, so that they will not suffer undue loss. Every effort will be made to continue their salaries at no more than a 15% reduction, whatever their new assignment.

---

Administrative Procedure 306.03 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-98/Rev 1-08)
