# 307 Insurance, Retirement and miscellaneous Benefit Programs

The Kansas City Public Library shall provide affordable health insurance, retirement and other programs for its employees and, to the extent possible within budgetary constraints, share in the cost of these programs for the benefit of the employee.

---

Board Policy 307 (Adopted 7-89)

---

## 307.01. Health Insurance

Full-time Employees. The Library offers health insurance to all regular full-time employees on a shared cost basis. Dependent coverage is also available on a shared cost basis when requested within thirty (30) days of employment or during an open enrollment period.

Employee payments are made on a pre-tax basis unless other arrangements are specifically requested in writing by the employee.

Details on open enrollment periods and changes in one's coverage of health or other insurance are available through Human Resources. For terminating employees, library-funded coverage ends the last day of the month in which the termination occurs. Under some circumstances terminated employees may elect to purchase temporary continued coverage at group rates under the Omnibus Budget Act. See Section 307.09 for information regarding health care continuation benefits.

Part-time. Part-time employees may receive health insurance stipends in which the employee contracts directly with the insurance carrier or has insurance otherwise. The amount of the subsidy/stipend is determined by the employee's FTE designation and is provided on a reimbursable basis.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.01 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-00)

---

## 307.02. Dental Insurance

The Library offers dental insurance available to all regular full-time employees on a shared cost basis. Dependent coverage is also available on a shared cost basis when requested within thirty (30) days of employment or during open enrollment.

Employee payments are made on a pre-tax basis unless other arrangements are specifically requested in writing by the employee.

Details on open enrollment periods and changes in one's coverage on dental or other insurances are available through Human Resources. For terminated employees, library-funded coverage ends the last day of the month in which the termination occurs. Under some circumstances terminated employees may elect to purchase temporary continued coverage at group rates under the Omnibus Budget Act. See Section 307.09 for information regarding dental care continuation benefits.

Part-time. Part-time employees may receive dental insurance stipends in which the employee contracts directly with a dental insurance carrier or otherwise has insurance covering them. The amount of the subsidy/stipend is the same for all part-time employees.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.02 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-00)

---

## 307.021. Retiree Health and Dental Insurance

Qualified retirees, as defined by the Public School Retirement System, and their dependents may continue health and dental insurance paying the full rate of the plan. Retiree coverage ends on the date in which the employee becomes eligible for Medicare. Because the Library does not provide a supplemental plan to Medicare, a retiree should contact a variety of sources for information on coverage at least 60 days in advance of eligibility.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.021 (Adopted 8-91/Rev. 7-00/Rev. 7-13)

---

## 307.03. Bus Pass and Parking Program

The Library offers monthly bus (transit) passes to all employees and parking to employees at a subsidized rate. Employees paying for "qualified transportation fringe benefits" through regular payroll deduction may opt to have the deduction on a pre-tax basis (in accordance with IRS Code, Section 132). Employees who do not need either the benefit of a bus pass or parking forego this benefit option. The payroll amount deducted from employees is not subject to Federal, state or local taxes.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.03 (Adopted 3-99/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 307.04. Life Insurance and Long Term Disability

Full-time employees are provided long term disability coverage by the Library. This coverage provides a benefit of 60% of monthly earnings to a maximum of $5,000 per month in case of total disability after 90 days of disability. The Library also provides a $20,000 life insurance policy for each full-time employee. Portable long-term disability, universal life and long-term care insurance are available through payroll deduction for both full and eligible part-time employees at a group rate.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.04 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-04)

---

## 307.05. Unemployment Insurance

Library employees who become unemployed or laid off through no fault of their own, may be eligible to draw unemployment compensation. Under these circumstances, an exiting employee should contact the state unemployment office or job service division in the state in which she/he resides.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.05 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-95)

---

## 307.06. Retirement Plan

Eligible Full Time Employees, .63 FTE and above, of The Kansas City Public Library participate in the Kansas City Public School Retirement System’s pension plan. Pension is a defined benefit which means, once retired, the KCPSRS lifetime monthly benefit is predictable and stable because it is calculated using a formula established by Missouri law. Years of service and salary are factors in determining the amount of the retirement benefit. KCPSRS benefits are designed to supplement Social Security benefits and personal savings in retirement.
KCPL participating full time employees are eligible to retire when the following condition(s) are met:

<strong>Regular Retirement Benefit:</strong>

Regular retirement (lifetime monthly) benefit, employees must meet the following qualification based on the appropriate plan.

<em>Plan B (Members retiring on or after June 30, 1999 and hired prior to January 1, 2014)</em>

1. Must be vested (contributed to KCPSRS for at least five (5) years).
2. Must be 60 years old; or must have at least 75 credits, with each year of creditable service (prorated for fractional years) equal to one credit, and each year of age (prorated for fractional years) equal to one credit.
3. Must have terminated employment with any KCPSRS participating employer.

<em>Plan C (Members hired after January 1, 2014)</em>

1. Must be vested (contributed to KCPSRS for at least five (5) years).
2. Must be 62 years old; or you must have at least 80 credits, with each year of creditable service (prorated for fractional years) equal to one credit, and each year of age (prorated for fractional years) equal to one credit.
3. Must have terminated employment with any KCPSRS participating employer.

<strong>Early Retirement Benefit</strong>

Employees can choose to receive an early retirement (reduced amount) once employee has become vested and attained the age of 55. The monthly benefit will be reduced based on the number of months the employee lacks meeting the full retirement requirement of being at least age 60 under Plan B and age 62 under Plan C.

<strong>Disability Benefit</strong>

Employees may be eligible to receive a disability retirement benefit if the following requirements are met:

1. Employee is vested.
2. Unable to perform your employment duties.
3. This incapacity is likely to be permanent.
4. The disability is certified by the Retirement System’s Medical Board and approved by the Board of Trustees.
5. Retiree may be subject to periodic re-evaluation of disability.
6. Retiree may be subject to annual income restrictions.
7. The disability commenced while employed with a covered employer.

<strong>Retirement Medical Program</strong>

The purpose of the Retirement Medical Program (RMP) is to provide a means for eligible employees of the Kansas City Public Library to pay for medical insurance and eligible expenses with non-taxed dollars from their Leave Accrual Payout.

<strong>Eligibility</strong>: Employees retiring on or after June 30, 1999 and hired prior to January 1, 2014 must be 60 years old; or must have at least 75 credits; or employees hired after January 1, 2014 must be 62 years old; or have at least 80 credits.

<strong>Benefits</strong>: Use pre-tax dollars for allowable expenses. RMP funds can pay for allowable expenses for yourself, your spouse, and/or your dependents who qualify as a dependent for federal tax purposes. Any funds remaining in your account upon your passing will go to your surviving spouse or designated beneficiary to be used for allowable expenses.

You may opt out of the plan only if you can provide written proof another employer is providing medical insurance and it is 100% employer paid, or are enrolled in a zero cost Medicare plan, at the time you retire/resign, or if covered under Military Insurance.

<strong>Retirement Medical Program Severance Pay Formula</strong>

(Minimum Severance Balance \$11,000)

First $10,000 paid to Employee / Next $10,001-$15,000 Paid to RMP / Over $15,000 paid to Employee

---

Administrative Procedure 307.06 (Adopted 3-83/Rev. 10-04/Rev. 7-19)

---

## 307.07. Social Security

Under present social security legislation, a percentage of an employee's pay is deducted with a comparable amount credited to the employee's account through payment by the Library.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.07 (Adopted 12-87)

---

## 307.08. Workers' Compensation

The Library carries Workers' Compensation Insurance in compliance with state law. This insurance provides compensation for a percentage of lost time; medical expenses; surgical expenses; and loss of life or dismemberment from injury arising out of, or in the course of, an employee's job assignment with the Library. To protect his/her interests in case of an injury or illness that she/he considers work-connected, an employee should be guided by the following:

1. The employee must report his/her injury or illness as soon as possible to the supervisor or Human Resources.
2. The employee must also complete an incident/injury report within 24 hours.
3. If complications arise in connection with a injury or illness while an employee is away from the Library, she/he should report to the supervisor and Human Resources by telephone.

All employee medical expenses will be paid for all eligible injuries. The employee may also collect compensation for time lost because of the injury but may not collect both Worker's Compensation and sick leave pay but may choose to supplement lost pay with other accrued time. Coverage for injuries to employees on the job is excluded from the employee health insurance policy coverage.

Questions pertaining to Workers' Compensation should be directed to Human Resources.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.08 (Adopted 7-95/Rev. 7/99)

---

## 307.09. Health Care Continuation Benefits (Also Referred to as COBRA and HIPAA)

In accordance with federal law (PL99-272, Title X), the Library offers full-time employees and their covered dependents the opportunity for a temporary extension of health coverage at group rates in certain instances where coverage under one of the Library's health plans would otherwise end. Employees and/or their covered dependents will be notified when appropriate so that they may exercise their right to this continued coverage. Instances where this is applicable include, but are not limited to, the reduction in scheduled hours of employment from full-time to part-time status and the termination of employment for reasons other than gross misconduct. This continuation coverage is strictly at the individual's expense.

In addition, in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act each exiting employee will also be notified of prior coverage provisions.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.09 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-98)

---

## 307.091. Leave Replacement Compensation Program

Full-time employees are not eligible for this program. The Leave Replacement Compensation Program provides part-time employees with remuneration in lieu of paid leave, such payment to be made annually in the month of February. Leave replacement compensation consists of a specified percentage of each part-time employee's salary for the previous year. To receive this compensation, an employee must have been employed for a minimum of six months, successfully completed the job introductory period and have received a paycheck from the Library for the last pay period of the year.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.091 (Adopted 7-93)

---

## 307.10. Deferred Compensation Plan/Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans

As a non-profit organization, the Library is able to offer employees special deferred compensation and tax sheltered annuity plans. Through these plans, before-tax dollars may be used to purchase an annuity. The dollars earn interest (also tax-deferred) for an employee's account until he/she retires or withdraws the money from the account.

Any regular status employee may participate in the Deferred Compensation Program. A salary reduction agreement must be signed before the first of the month when participation is to begin. An employee's contribution to either program will be payroll deducted. The salary reduction agreement continues as long as an employee remains with the Library or until he or she terminates it. Information regarding the Deferred Compensation/Tax Sheltered Annuity programs is available through the Library's Human Resources Department.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.10 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 9-96)

---

## 307.11. Credit Union

All employees are eligible to join the member credit unions through payroll deduction. Descriptive brochures detailing all phases of services are available at the credit union offices.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.11 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 307.12. Employee Assistance Program

The Kansas City Public Library recognizes that personal and work problems can often be dealt with successfully when identified early and referred to appropriate care. Therefore, the Library provides employee assistance services to full and part-time employees and to members of their immediate family. The Library's EAP (Employee Assistance Program) provides an opportunity for all employees to obtain confidential assistance in resolving personal and work problems as the need arises. Further, while there is no intent to intrude upon employee's personal lives, it is appropriate when there are indications of declining work performance, attendance or behavioral problems that employees be offered professional and confidential assistance to resolve their problems. The EAP deals with the broad range of human problems including: emotional/behavioral, family and marital, alcohol and/or drug, financial, legal, work and other personal problems. The EAP provides problem assessment, short-term counseling and referral. Costs for these services are covered by the Library. Costs incurred for other services not covered by insurance or other benefits are the responsibility of the employee.

1. The policy applies to all full and part-time employees of the Library no matter what their job title or responsibilities.
2. The program is available to employees or members of their immediate family on a self-referral basis since problems at home can affect the job. If employees or immediate family members have personal or work problems that may benefit from assistance, they are encouraged to use the program.
3. Participation in the program will not jeopardize an employee's job security, promotional opportunities or reputation.
4. All records and discussions of personal or work problems will be handled in a confidential manner. These records will be kept by the EAP and will not become a part of the employee's personnel file
5. Employees will be encouraged to seek assistance to determine if personal or work problems are causing unsatisfactory job performance. Participation in the program is the personal choice of the individual.
6. All levels of management are responsible for using this program when appropriate to assist in resolving job performance problems related to personal problems.
7. Sick leave may be granted for treatment or rehabilitation on the same basis as for other health problems. Time off without pay will also be given when needed or when the employee has no sick leave accrual, such as with part-time employees.
8. This policy is not intended to supplant the normal disciplinary process or any way block access to the grievance procedures. Employees have the choice of accepting or rejecting a management referral to the EAP. If the employee accepts the EAP's assistance, it is the employee's option whether or not to give written consent for the EAP to provide the referring supervisor or manager with the following information: whether the employee has contacted the EAP and whether or not the employee is following recommendations. No information regarding the nature of the employee's problem will be given to the Library or the employee's supervisor.

Employees participating in the EAP are expected to meet existing work performance standards.

---

Administrative Procedure 307.12 (Adopted 11-95/Rev. 9-96)
