# 308 Holidays, Vacation and Leaves of Absence

## i. Holidays

The Kansas City Public Library recognizes the following paid holidays for all regular full-time employees:

- New Year's Day
- Independence Day
- Martin Luther King's Birthday
- Labor Day
- President's Day
- Thanksgiving Day
- Memorial Day
- Christmas Day

Full-time Staff. If a paid holiday falls on a scheduled day off or during a scheduled vacation, a full-time employee may, with the prior approval of his/her supervisor, extend his/her day off or scheduled vacation by one (1) day for each holiday falling within the vacation period or on a scheduled day off.

Part-time Staff. Employees whose normal schedule includes a day of the week when the Library will be closed for a holiday will be allowed to make up the missed time only at the convenience of the Library.

Rate. The rate for holiday pay will be based solely on the employee's regular straight rate of pay at the time of the holiday.

All regular full-time employees earn 2 hours of floating holiday/personal leave per full pay period. This type of leave accrues to a maximum of 52 hours at any time. Personal/holiday time is prorated when an employee fails to be paid for a complete pay period. Use of holiday/personal leave should be authorized by supervisors in advance except in emergencies. The rate of pay for holiday/personal leave should be as above for holidays. Employees who separate from the Library with holiday/personal leave hours credited to their account will be compensated for those hours at their current hourly rate.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.01 (Adopted 3-83/Rev. 7-00/Rev 1-08)

---

## ii. Vacation Entitlement

Accrual rates. Regular full-time employees earn vacation time beginning the first pay period worked. Vacation time for all regular full-time employees is based on the employee's status with the library and/or length of service and will be earned as follows:

Employees in non-professional positions (those classed as Library Associate or below) with less than five (5) full years of employment: 4.615 hours vacation leave per full pay period or fifteen working days each year.

Employees in skilled or professional positions (those classed as Technical/ Maintenance/ Skilled or above) or any regular full-time employee having completed five (5) full years of regular employment as part-time or full-time: 6.15 hours vacation leave per full pay period or twenty working days each year.

Vacation time shall not exceed 320 hours on June 30 of each year. Any vacation time in excess of the 320 hours will be converted to hours in the individual's sick leave bank. In some situations, employees shall have "grandparented" vacation maximums which were established on June 30, 1995. Excess hours will be handled the same.

Pay out. Unused accrued vacation time up to 320 hours will be paid upon termination of employment at the employee's current rate of pay. Accrued vacation hours in excess of 320 will be rolled over into the individual’s sick leave bank. Full-time employees moving to part-time status and those resigning to join the substitute pool will also have vacation time paid out after all full times hours are paid.

Vacation shall be scheduled upon the prior approval of supervisors, preferably with at least one month's notice, and must be taken at the convenience of the Library.

If a paid holiday falls during a scheduled vacation, the vacation may be extended with prior supervisory approval by one (1) day or the employee may retain the additional vacation day for future use.

Vacation pay will be based solely on the employee's regular straight rate of pay at the time the vacation is taken. Employees will not be paid in lieu of using vacation time except upon retirement or termination from the Library.

Once a year, upon approval of the Library Director, an optional payout of future vacation leave accruals for up to 40 hours may be offered to eligible employees. To be eligible to opt-in for the optional payout, an employee must have at least 2 weeks or 80 hours of combined vacation/personal holiday time remaining after the vacation payout occurs. The Human Resources Director will communicate the process and guidelines for the payout.

Advancing vacation. Only in exceptional and unusual circumstances and with the prior approval of the Human Resources Director may employees take vacation in excess of unused vacation benefits earned. Vacation benefits do not accrue while an employee is on unpaid time.

Part-time. Part-time employees may take unpaid vacations not to exceed four "work" weeks in any calendar year. A week equals the equivalent number of hours a part-time person would normally work.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.02 (Adopted 3-83/Rev. 12-02/Rev 1-08/Rev 7-12/Rev 5-15/Rev 7-16/Rev 10-18)

---

## iii. Sick/Medical and Funeral Leave

Earning Sick Leave. Regular full-time employees shall earn and accrue paid sick leave. Paid sick leave is earned at the rate of 3.69 hours per full pay period (twelve [12] days per year).

In addition to regular sick leave accrual, an employee's sick leave bank may grow due to the transfer of vacation hours which were accrued over eligible maximums.

Unused accrued sick leave will be paid upon termination of employment at the employee's current pay rate according to the following formula, provided the same is permitted by applicable law:

— Hours of earned unused sick leave, up to a maximum of 900 hours, multiplied by years of service multiplied by three percent up to a maximum of 75 percent.

Employees who had over 900 sick leave hours accrued as of July 1, 2012 shall have a "grandfathered" maximum of sick leave eligible for pay out. If the sick leave balance of a grandfathered employee falls below the previously established grandfathered maximum on June 30, the grandfathered maximum for payout purposes will be reduced to reflect the balance in effect on June 30.

Use of Sick Leave. When an employee is ill, the appropriate supervisor or a member of the Library Office staff should be notified before the employee's scheduled starting time. Please see Section 311.07 of the Policy and Procedure Manual for more information on reporting absences.

Sick leave is primarily intended for use in cases of an employee's illness, temporary disability or for medical/dental appointments. It may also be used by either parent in conjunction with an approved leave of absence due to the arrival of a newborn child, newly adopted or foster child. This time off must be scheduled in advance with the employee's supervisor.

Extended Illness Provisions. After three days of absence for personal illness, an employee is normally required to submit a physician's verification stating the nature of the illness before sick leave is granted. When it reasonably appears that an employee will return to work within five working days and with the prior approval of the supervisor and Human Resources Director, an employee may take paid sick leave in excess of the amount accrued.

Employees on sick leave are to return to work as soon as medically feasible. Employees returning to work after extended leave are required to supply the Library with a doctor's statement certifying they are able to return to their normal duties.

If an employee with illness or temporary disability wishes to work until some future date when medical assistance or surgery is available or timely, the Library reserves the right to request periodic statements from the employee's doctor (or to have such an evaluation made by a doctor selected and paid by the Library) to certify that continued work will not adversely affect the employee's health. Employees who continue to work during illness or disability will be required to discontinue working if so advised by a physician.

Use of Sick Leave for Family Members and Domestic Partners. Sick leave can also be used by the employee in the event of the personal illness of a member of one's immediate family. Immediate family is interpreted to mean the employee's father, mother, spouse, domestic partner, sister, brother, child or anyone of like relationship by marriage. After three days of absence for the illness of an immediate family member, an employee may be required to submit a certificate signed by a physician stating the extent and nature of the illness before the additional sick leave is allowed. Employees needing extended time off to provide family care may then utilize policy #308.05.

Sick Time Use for Bereavement Leave. Employees may use sick time to prepare for a funeral or attend the funeral or grieve the death of a member of the employee's immediate family (as defined in the paragraph above). Such use of sick time is limited to 5 consecutive work days.

Pay Out. Prorated sick leave, up to a maximum of 900 hours is paid out to full-time employees when terminating employment, moving to part-time or moving to substitute status.

Medical Leave. Employees needing extended time away from work due to illness, surgery, or other medically defined reasons may use accrued sick leave and should apply for a leave of absence when it appears the absence will be of a defined or lengthy duration.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.03 (Adopted 3-83/Rev. 12-02/Rev 1-08/Rev 7-12)

---

## iv. Leave of Absence - Conditions

A leave of absence is any period of time away from work other than a planned vacation that could include, but is not limited to, the following conditions:

1. The absence will be of a defined duration.
2. The absence may be planned or unplanned and results in being away from work for some duration.
3. The absence may include paid and unpaid time.

General Provisions

1. An employee may request a leave of absence at any time. Depending on the type of leave a valid request will normally be honored if the employee has worked at least 12 months or 1,250 hours during the preceding 12 months.
2. In some cases, employees may be placed on a leave of absence by the Library.
3. Requests for leaves of absence are considered on a case by case basis. when possible, a leave should be requested in advance and must be approved by the Library Director. All terms and conditions relating to the leave of absence will be specified in the Library's authorization for the leave.
4. Except at the discretion of the Library Director, leaves of absence may not be used as part of the notice period when an employee tenders his/her resignation from the Library.
5. An employee's seniority with the Library shall not be affected by time spent on an unpaid leave of absence.
6. Leave of absence status shall not alter the month in which an employee's salary may be adjusted for a recommended merit increase (except when otherwise specified).
7. The length of a leave depends on the type of leave. No leaves, except education leaves, will normally extend beyond 12 weeks.
8. Employees granted leaves of absence will generally be allowed to return to the position formerly held, with the same personnel classification and rate of pay. Details relating to the specific placement of an employee will be negotiated in advance of a leave being granted and will be outlined authorizing a specific leave of absence.
9. Leaves due to Workers Compensation reasons follow the policies and provisions of the Family Leave Act, 1993.

Benefit Provisions

1. A full-time employee may continue health and dental coverage during the leave. The cost is dependent upon the type of leave and the employee's pay status. Upon return to work from a FMLA leave or military leave, if the employee has discontinued medical or dental benefits, he/she may have coverage restored as if the leave had not been taken. All other leaves require compliance with benefit enrollment guidelines.
2. Part-time employees may continue to receive supplement reimbursements for health and dental coverage if on a Family Medical Leave or military leave. Employees on such leaves must have proof that premiums for the coverage were paid during the leave.
3. Full-time employees may use eligible accrued paid leave benefits during any approved leave of absence.
4. When members are on leave of absence without pay, they must make monthly contributions to the retirement fund if they wish to continue building their service record for retirement eligibility. When a full-time employee takes a leave of absence without pay, the Kansas City School District Retirement Office will notify him or her of the steps necessary to protect his/her retirement eligibility.
5. Library sponsored Life and disability insurance premiums for full-time employees on approved unpaid leaves are suspended during the leave period.
6. Leaves due to Workers Compensation reasons are restricted under the general provisions of the Family Leave Act, 1993.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.04 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 12-02)

---

## v. Family Medical and Personal Illness Leave

The Library provides family and medical leaves in accordance with applicable law, including the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and subject to 308.04 above.

An “eligible full-time employee” is one who has been employed for at least twelve (12) months and must have provided 1,250 hours of service during that period.

The FMLA entitles eligible employees of covered employers to take unpaid, job protected leave for specified family and medical reasons with continuation of group health insurance coverage under the same terms and conditions as if the employee had not taken leave. Eligible employees are entitled to:

- Twelve workweeks of leave in a 12-month period for:
  - the birth of a child and to care for the newborn child within one year of birth;
  - the placement with the employee of a child for adoption or foster care and to care for the newly placed child within one year of placement;
  - to care for the employee’s spouse, domestic partner, child, stepchild, or parent who has a serious health condition;
  - a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the essential functions of his or her job;
  - any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or parent is a covered military member on “covered active duty;” or
- Twenty-six workweeks of leave during a single 12-month period to care for a covered service member with a serious injury or illness if the eligible employee is the service member’s spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin (military caregiver leave).

Leave does not necessarily have to be taken all at once. Leave may be taken on an intermittent basis (i.e., one week per month) or on a reduced schedule basis (four or five hours per day). Intermittent or reduced schedule leave taken for a serious health condition — either of the employee or of an immediate family member — may be taken "if medically necessary." The employee’s manager and the Human Resources Department must approve intermittent or reduced-schedule leave taken for the birth or adoption of a child.

If an employee's request for intermittent leave is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment, the employee may be required to transfer temporarily to an alternative position (with equivalent pay and benefits) in order to better accommodate repeated periods of absence.

Employees are to give thirty (30) days’ notice for leave taken for the birth or adoption of a child, assuming the employee is able to give such notice; if not, the employee must give such notice as is practicable. For leave taken on the basis of planned medical treatment, employees should seek to schedule the treatment so as to avoid unduly disrupting the operations of the Library.

The Library will require the employee to first use his or her VACATION AND SICK LEAVE time for any part of the twelve (12) week period. If such paid leave is not available, the Library provides unpaid leave to total twelve (12) weeks.

With leave taken on the basis of a serious health condition, the Library may require the employee to provide certification of the condition and the fact that the employee is unable to perform his or her job functions, or certification of the fact that the employee is needed to care for a family member. In the case of intermittent leave, this certification must also provide the dates and duration of the treatments to be given. The Library has the right to seek a second opinion at its expense. Such information will be obtained and such exams will be conducted in accordance with the ADA. All medical information will be maintained in confidence in accordance with the ADA.

Upon return to work, the employee will be restored to the position he or she held when the leave commenced, or to an equivalent position with equivalent employment benefits, pay, and other terms or conditions of employment.

In addition, leave does not result in the loss of any employment benefit accrued prior to the date the leave began (except insofar as the employee is required to exhaust accrued paid leave). The employee is not entitled to any right, benefit or position of employment other than that to which he or she would have been entitled if no leave had taken place.

If the employee is an employee within the highest-paid 10 percent of the Library workforce, obligations and options will be discussed at the time the benefit is requested.

During the period of leave, if the employee is enrolled in the group health plan, it will be offered to the employee for the duration of the leave at the level and under the conditions that the coverage would have been offered if no leave had taken place. If the employee fails to return to work at the end of the leave, the Library has the option and may recoup the premiums paid for maintaining health coverage. Health coverage costs are not recouped when the employee fails to return to work due to a continuation or recurrence of a serious health condition.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.05 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-00/Rev. 5-18)

---

## li. Personal Leave

Leaves of absence may be granted for other personal reasons unrelated to those stated in 308.05. These personal-reason leaves shall not exceed six weeks, and require a full time employee to pay COBRA rates for health and dental coverage if on unpaid time. In addition, part time employees are not eligible to receive the health and dental stipends while on a personal leave. Such leave is not covered by Federal Family and Medical Leave Act provisions. When applicable, life and disability insurance coverage are suspended during this time if the leave is taken without pay.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.05 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-00)

---

## vi. Military Leave

Military leave will be granted for an employee for the purpose of allowing him/her to perform the annual tour of duty for training within the armed forces to fulfill reserve obligations, and/or for active duty. An employee may take military leave through use of annual leave or approved leave without pay.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.06 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 12-91)

---

## vii. Educational Leave

Educational leave shall be applied according to the following guidelines:

1. Library employees enrolled in library or highly job related degree programs shall be eligible for up to one year's leave upon the prior approval of the Library Director.
2. Any personal education (attendance on Library time neither required nor approved by the Library) will be on the employee's own time.
3. The Library may assist employees with some expenses associated with tuition/registration fees or highly related conference/workshop costs if the content of the training will benefit the employee and the library (see section below).
4. Availability of educational leave and associated support is based on availability of financial resources and scheduling at Library outlets.
5. When an employee is on an educational leave, her/his merit review and class advancement dates will be extended by the period of the leave, whether the leave is paid or not. The new date becomes the annual merit and classification advancement date.
6. Health and dental insurances will be available at COBRA rates if the employee is on unpaid leave. Life and disability insurance coverage is suspended during unpaid educational leave.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.07 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 9-96)

---

## viii. Jury or Court Service

Library employees are expected to fulfill their obligation when called to serve on a jury or when subpoenaed to appear as a witness before a court or administrative tribunal. When such service would interfere with the employee's normal work schedule, the Library will insure that no loss of benefits or pay results. However, any pay except mileage that an employee receives for jury service must be turned in to the Library Office the employee to be compensated for "worked" hours by the Library.

When released from jury or witness duties, employees must immediately return to their job and complete the scheduled work day. Full-time employees may take approved time off with benefit time after properly notifying their supervisor. Part-time employees may take approved time off, but must notify the supervisor if continued work time was available. Employees shall not work in excess of an eight-hour day as a result of combined jury/court service and regularly scheduled work hours.

Specific arrangements for any court or jury service should be reported to the employee's supervisor.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.08 (Adopted 12-7/Rev. 7-99)

---

## ix. Emergency Leave of Absence

Library supervisors are authorized to grant any employee under his/her supervision an emergency leave of absence without pay for legitimate medical or personal reasons. Such an emergency leave of absence must be of three days or less in duration and assumes that the employee does not have other paid leave appropriate to the situation. If more than three days of unpaid emergency leave is required, the absence must be approved by the Library Director.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.09 (Adopted 12-87)

---

## x. Voting Time

By state law, employees shall be entitled for voting purposes to absent themselves without loss of pay from any service or employment for a period of up to three hours between the time the polls open and close. Permission must be obtained in advance from the employer and it must be shown that there are not three hours that the polls are open, when the employee is not in the service of the Library.

---

Administrative Procedure 308.10 (Adopted 12-87)
