# 309 Salary and Paycheck Practices

## 309.01. Paychecks

Regular paydays for all Library employees occur biweekly. . If the normal payday falls on a weekend or holiday, paychecks for the payday shall be distributed the preceding working day. Paychecks for all staff compensate the employee for the pay period immediately prior to the one during which the paychecks are issued. The Library is unable under any circumstances to pay employees in advance.

Each paycheck or direct deposit stub will have an attached statement listing gross pay, itemizing deductions, and noting accrued leave.

Paychecks are void after 90 days.

Final checks are available on the regular payday schedule. Full-time employees' accrued vacation, personal/holiday and pro-rated sick time pay out are a separate check on the subsequent available pay day.

Replacement checks for those lost or misplaced will normally be issued after two full business days. Notification that a check was not received must be submitted in written form to the Finance Office (Fax and e-mail are acceptable).

Direct Deposit is available to all employees and is recommended to insure a prompt deposit into an employee's bank account. In lieu of a check, the employee receives a statement outlining the deposited amount and all deductions.

---

Administrative Procedures 309.01 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02/Rev 1-08)

---

## 309.02. Payroll Deductions

Compulsory deductions such as retirement, income tax, Social Security and Medicare are made from each paycheck. Voluntary deductions such as United Fund, Credit Union, additional health insurance, deferred compensation, parking, etc. may be authorized by the employee.

---

Administrative Procedure 309.02 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-91)

---

## 309.03. Time Sheets

All hourly Library employees shall record hours worked using the method provided for this purpose. Hourly employees shall record actual times worked plus the total number of hours worked and any paid leave time taken. Salaried employees shall record any paid leave time taken. Supervisors shall be responsible for verifying the hours reported by their staff. Supervisors should monitor payroll information records frequently

---

Administrative Procedure 309.03 (Adopted 7-99/Rev 1-08)

---

## 309.04. Compensatory and Overtime

Non-exempt employees who work more than 40 hours in a given week may be reimbursed with compensatory time. Compensatory time must be authorized in advance by an immediate supervisor and it's recommended that it's taken within a week after it is earned. All compensatory time should be taken only at the convenience of the Library, but requests to take accrued compensatory time will be granted within a reasonable period after the request is made, whenever possible. Supervisors are responsible for maintaining an accurate account of compensatory time earned and taken by subordinates.

In accordance with the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the library's non-exempt employees (those paid hourly, plus all clerical, technical and paraprofessional staff) shall be reimbursed for overtime with compensatory time in the amount of 1 1/2 times the number of hours worked in excess of 40.

As a benefit, exempt employees (professional and supervisory staff) may receive "portable flextime" for whole hours worked in excess of 40. Portable flextime cannot exceed 24 hours and must also be authorized in advance by an immediate supervisor. Portable flextime may be used in lieu of accrued time.

Only under unusual circumstances and with the prior approval of a Deputy Director and the Library Director will the Library pay overtime.

---

Administrative Procedure 309.04 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 309.06. Make-Up Time

The Library does not encourage time off to be made up at a later date. If this becomes necessary, the time must be made up as soon as possible, preferably within a week, at a time which serves the Library's needs. Time to be made up should be in units of at least half an hour. Working through lunch or rest periods is not an acceptable make-up procedure. Supervisors are responsible for recording hours missed and made-up by their subordinates.

---

Administrative Procedure 309.06 (Adopted 8-86)

---

## 309.07. Pay for Inclement Weather and Unusual Conditions

Inclement weather or unusual conditions that prevent employees from meeting assigned schedules at their normal workplace are circumstances over which the Library has no control. Therefore,

1. In fairness to all, only those who report to work when the library is open during inclement weather or unusual conditions will be paid. Those employees who do not report to work will not be paid, and full-time employees will be required to use accrued leave time, if any, for credit toward the work week.
2. If an individual employee is allowed to go home early during inclement or unusual conditions when the library remains open, the employee will be credited with only those hours worked and will be required to use accrued leave time, if any, for credit toward the work week.
3. If the Library or an individual branch, or a department closes during business hours, employees scheduled to work that day, including substitutes, will be paid for all hours they were scheduled to work.
4. If the Library, or an individual branch or department is closed the entire day or opens late because of inclement weather or unusual conditions and advance notice is not possible, all employees and substitutes will be paid for the hours they were scheduled to work.
5. When advance notice is possible for closings or delayed openings, employees may be assigned to another work location or if no alternative work location and/or assignment is available, employees will not be paid, and full-time employees will be required to use accrued leave time, if any, for credit toward the work week. Advance notice includes, but not limited to, closing a location for a scheduled outage or construction project or notifying employees the night before for closures or delayed openings.
6. Employees not scheduled to work on days when the Library is closed because of inclement weather or unusual conditions will not be compensated.

See section 313.01 regarding practices followed in determining when the library system shall be closed for inclement conditions.

---

Administrative Procedure 309.07 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-95, 2-19)

---

## 309.08. Use of Personal Automobiles

Library cars are available for conducting library business by coordinating their use through the Library Office. Personal cars may also be used for library business, including attendance at library system meetings. Employees shall be reimbursed for authorized use of their personal automobile for the benefit of the Library at the per mile rate established by the Administration. Reimbursement shall be paid by check when a claim is submitted on a mileage/expense form. Claims should be accumulated to a minimum of \$10.00 before being submitted for reimbursement.

In addition, library cars are encouraged for in-state or regional events, especially when two (2) or more employees will be in attendance. Other than these approved events, library cars are restricted from being outside of the Library district after library hours.

---

Administrative Procedure 309.08 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)
