# 310 Staff Development/Continuing Education

Staff development and continuing education programs supply the foundation from which employees build and maintain the knowledge and skills necessary to achieve quality library service and their own sense of job satisfaction. In recognition of this, the library shall undertake to support learning opportunities for employees through the establishment of an in-service staff development program to upgrade employees' job skills and improve library services.

---

Board Policy 310 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-89/Rev. 5-2007)

---

## 310.01. Staff Development

Responsibility. The staff development program includes but is not limited to orientation of new staff, staff meetings, written and audiovisual training materials, sponsored training events at the library, and attendance at seminars, institutes, professional meetings, conferences, and meetings of local, civic and educational organizations. The responsibility for staff development falls with the supervisor and employee as a cooperative effort between one another. Human Resources serves as a resource as well as other professionals on the Library's staff.

1. Supervisors are expected to provide training on: assigned duties of the employee's position, what constitutes effective performance; and plans, policies and goals of the department. In addition, the supervisor's role is to have the employee assume responsibility for their work, find means for self development and make use of the employee's special interests, knowledge and abilities. Departmental training is the responsibility of the supervisor and may be in conjunction with on-the-job training from other staff members, use of structured training, or may be informal but with specific goals in mind. The goal is to teach specific skills, techniques and procedures; to further the employee's understanding of library objectives and to enhance the knowledge needed for effective job performance.
2. The employee is responsible for taking advantage of learning opportunities, finding learning activities which contribute to her/his success in their position, and implementation of learned skills in their job.
3. Human Resources provides information on learning opportunities, works with supervisors in designing individual and/or group staff development activities, and assists staff in finding financial assistance to participate in these activities when possible.

Work-time Learning Activities. These may include but are not limited to: in-house courses, on-site training, attendance at professional meetings, conferences, pre-conferences, off-site workshops and training, user group meetings, etc. Attendance at these activities is usually through either support by one earning their regular rate of pay, payment of fees for attendance by the library, allocation of money specified as a "sponsorship," or a combination of these.

Work-time. Pay, while attending staff development activities, is usually limited to eight hours per day or may be on a workweek basis. Attendance must be requested and approved by the Library. Compensatory time may be awarded if the training program requires attendance at a formal instructional session as in the evening or if the employee is required to return to the Library for scheduled work time, and the Library finds it necessary to require a staff member to attend a specific session on library time. If the employee is not normally scheduled to work the hours of the learning activity, the employee may be allowed compensatory time at the discretion of the department head and the Library Executive Director.

Enhancement of Job Knowledge. Keeping up on current developments in one's field is another component of staff development. All professional staff are expected to keep abreast of current library literature and developments as part of their basic job responsibilities. As appropriate, supervisors also have the responsibility for sharing particular articles, books or other relevant information with their staff, which can be read on work or personal time.

Employee's Own Time. Non work-time activities can be another important aspect of the Library's staff development. Courses and activities taken on one's own time and at one's own expense help round out an employee's learning experiences.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.01 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-99/Rev 1-08)

---

## 310.03. Professional Association Involvment, Meeting Attendance and Conferences

All staff members are encouraged to participate and assume a leadership role in professional associations at all levels: local, regional, state, national and international. The Library believes participation provides experience, offers opportunities for professional growth and is beneficial to the Library. Prior to committing to involvement, the employee must have the approval of his/her immediate supervisor, Deputy Director or the Library Executive Director.

Qualifying Activities. Professional associations shall be defined as local, regional, state, national and international organizations that are 1) library-related (e.g. concerned with the acquisition, organization, preservation and sharing of information) or 2) related to a subject specialty with direct bearing on the employee's position with the Library. Meeting shall be defined as related to general conferences, special assemblies, workshops, institutes and committees.

Membership Fees. Membership fees are usually the responsibility of the employee. The Library also pays for institutional memberships in the Library's name, which benefit employees by allowing staff to have individual membership benefits.

Funding and Financial Support. Employees may attend activities in a variety of ways:

1. Sponsorship allows the employee to attend on Library time and with the Library paying the fee (does not allow use of Continuing Education money). Sponsorship may include a meeting, conference, pre-conference or other activity.
2. Continuing Education money can be used to attend professional association activities at the discretion of the Library Executive Director.
3. A combination of, sponsorship, time off and/or employee paid support may also be negotiated for attendance at professional association activities.

Determining Approval. In determining who shall be granted permission to attend professional association meetings, first priority shall be given to full-time staff members who hold office, have committee responsibilities or who are appearing on the program at such events. Beyond these considerations, attendance will be rotated among staff whose jobs are directly related to the program content. Each attendee will be responsible for giving a brief written or verbal account of the proceedings to their immediate supervisor. A request to attend a meeting or conference should be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor well in advance of travel plans. Requests require the approval of the supervisor, Deputy Director and Library Executive Director.

Time. Nonexempt staff may include documented travel time and time attending a professional association activity as work time. To avoid compensatory time at 1 1/2 times, employees and supervisors should adjust schedules accordingly. Exempt staff will normally not be paid for travel to or attendance at professional association activities if it is outside normal working hours.

Under the FLSA, travel time is considered work time for non-exempt employees in the following scenarios:

1. Travel time during the work day is work-related and considered hours worked.
2. Travel time for overnight, out of town assignments is compensable if the travel occurs during normal working hours – including those hours on regularly scheduled days off. Example, if an employee works 9 – 5:30 MWF but travels on Sunday to an out-of-town trip leaving at 8 AM and arriving at 12 noon – the employee would have 3 hours treated as hours worked (9 – 12).
3. Travel time outside of normal working hours spent as a passenger in a car (includes the driver), train, airplane, bus or boat is not compensable under the FLSA unless work is performed during that time.
4. If the employees decide to carpool, and they travel from 6 PM to 9 PM, then the time for everyone in the car is not compensable.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.03 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-99/Rev 1-08/Rev 7-16)

---

## 310.04. Claiming Reimbursement for Travel or Conference Expense

Travel for Library business is either "local" or "out-of-area." Local travel is defined as being within the state of Missouri or in an adjoining state within 180 miles of the Library. Local travel does not typically include the need for overnight accommodations. Out-of-area travel generally involves commercial transportation and one or more nights of accommodation. All out-of-area travel at Library expense must be approved in advance by the Board of Trustees. Local travel must be approved in advance administratively.

Local Travel. To be reimbursed for local travel, an employee must have received prior supervisory and administrative approval. Upon completion of the travel, the employee should submit a "Mileage/Expense Reimbursement Claim" for mileage reimbursement for the use of their personal vehicle and reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses. Receipts or other documentation substantiating the claim must be attached to the form.

Out-of-Area Travel. Out-of-area travel must be approved in advance both administratively and by the Board of Trustees. Reimbursement is usually based on a stipend or daily stipend rate. Claiming reimbursement requires completion of the "Travel Expense Reimbursement Claim" form within 10 working days after return from the trip. The Library will reimburse reasonable and prudent expenses up to the maximum amount allowed. Eligible expenses may include mileage from home to commercial carrier, commercial travel, airport fees for parking, lodging expenses, meals (at no more than the Federal reimbursement) and miscellaneous expenses (up to a maximum of \$25 per day) for tips, gratuities and local transportation. All expenses must be itemized on the reimbursement claim form with the original receipts attached when possible and practical. Receipts or other documentation for hotel and commercial transportation expense must be attached for reimbursement.

Approved travel stipends may include prepaid commercial transportation and/or registration provided the employee allows the Library to make the commercial travel arrangements and registration information is provided to the Library within prescribed time lines. Employees bear the responsibility of charges made for changes in travel arrangements should the cost of the change and new ticket price exceed the original amount arranged. When the Library prepays the commercial travel and/or registration, these amounts come from the stipend amount when reimbursement is requested.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.04 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 310.05. Educational Assistance Programs

General Assistance. The Library has an educational assistance program that provides tuition, fee and/or registration fee payments to staff members within the guidelines of 310.06 and 310.07. Assistance is provided on a prepaid basis when requests are made according to deadlines established in Human Resources. Eligible employees must be in good standing with the Library (i.e. not on disciplinary probation), and have successfully completed their initial six month Introductory Period.

Loan Program. In addition to the Library's educational assistance program, Human Resources coordinates an educational loan program, which was started through support of the Friends of the Library. Approved loans are available for items not covered by (or in excess of) the Educational assistance program or out of area travel costs, or in lieu of library funding for educational purposes. Eligible expenses may include: books, course materials, fees, tuition; and costs related to other library or job related continuing education activities, such as expenses related to conference attendance. All loans are arranged without interest or fees. Repayment is arranged through convenient payroll deduction. Details are available in Human Resources and on the Staff Web.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.05 (Adopted 12-87/revised 7-00)

---

## 310.06. Academic Credit Course Work Assistance

Definition. Regular status part-time and full-time Library employees (Attendant classification and above) are eligible for partial or full tuition and registration fee reimbursement. Courses must be library related, job related, part of a general degree program (AA, BA or BS), or towards a graduate degree that is highly job related. Courses taken must be from accredited higher education institutions. Courses or the degree sought should enable an employee to advance within the Library's structure. Such reimbursement is limited to a specified amount determined each fiscal year per credit hour, cannot exceed 6 hours in any calendar year, and is limited to funding availability.

Requirements. The employee must:

1. meet the qualifications in 310.05; and
2. apply and be approved in advance of taking the course (see Append.: 310.06); and
3. request educational assistance only for tuition and fees which have not been paid through any other grant or scholarship; and
4. attain a grade of "C" for undergraduate or "B" for graduate courses, or better to avoid having to reimburse the assistance amount to the Library.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.06 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 1-98)

---

## 310.07. Non-Academic Credit Work Assistance

Definition. Employees (eligible for academic credit course work reimbursement? See "Eligibility") are eligible for a maximum amount, as determined each fiscal year, for unlimited workshops, audited courses, institutes or non-academic courses that are job or library-related. Use of any of the money for payment of non-academic activities reduces the benefit for academic courses from six to three credit hours.

Aide Eligibility. All employees classified as Library Aide and above are eligible for non-academic money, up to a maximum amount, as determined each fiscal year for unlimited workshops, audited courses, institutes, or other non-academic courses that are job or library related after being employed for at least one year in a regular part or full-time position. While an Aide, an employee cannot receive academic moneys, but if he or should transfer into a position classified at the level of Attendant or above, then he/she will fall within the full guidelines of 310.5 and 310.6 immediately.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.07 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 310.08. Conditions of Reimbursement and Verification

Use of Funds. Continuing education money for academic work and/or non-academic course work, conference attendance, or other eligible learning activities allows an employee to receive continuing education units (if requested and approved) as long as the attendance is on the employee's own time and the activity was approved in advance.

Verification. E-mail or other written verification of satisfactory continuing education activity completion must be submitted to the employee's supervisor(s) and forwarded to Human Resources within 30 days of the last day of the learning activity or the Library has the right to begin payroll deducting the money.

Conditions of Receipt. Payment of continuing education money to any employee implies the employee agrees to remain in the Library's employment for six months after completion of the class and workshop. Failure to continue employment for six months will normally result in the employee being required to pay back the education assistance received by deducting the assistance paid from the employee's last check. Any employee who resigns or is discharged prior to satisfactory completion of the course for which she/he received payment shall have the full amount of money received deducted from her/his last pay or severance check.

Re-Payment Courtesy. Funds from stipends and sponsorships do not have a repayment provision, although the Library encourages staff to not attend professional meetings, conferences, etc. if the employee has reason to believe she/he cannot or will not remain in the Library's employment for six months after the event.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.071 (Adopted 10-90/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 310.09. Educational Leave of Absence

Employees who are enrolled in library or highly job related degree programs will be eligible, upon the approval of the Library Director, for up to one year of unpaid educational leave-of-absence during the pursuit of the degree. For additional information regarding educational leaves, see section 308.07 above.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.08 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 7-95)

---

## 310.10. Income Tax and Educational Assistance

The taxing status of educational benefits will be in accordance with current Internal Revenue Service codes. Employees are encouraged to contact the Library's payroll staff prior to applying for educational assistance for current status.

---

Administrative Procedure 310.10 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 9-96)
