# 311 General Employment Practices

The purpose of this section of the manual is to communicate basic information regarding the Library's expectations as an employer. Information contained in the manual should not be regarded as a substitute for discussion between an employee and his/her supervisor in matters of job-related questions or concerns. Employees are encouraged to consult their supervisors for further guidance in all such areas. In establishing guidelines, it is not the intention of the Library to restrict employees' rights, but rather to protect the rights and increase the safety and happiness of all employees.

---

Administrative Procedure 311 (Adopted 8-86)

---

## i. "Coffee" and Dinner Breaks

Staff members may request one fifteen-minute coffee break for each continuous 4 hours worked. Break time is considered work time, and the employee is considered "on call" during that time.

Breaks should never be taken at the expense of service to the public. When staff shortages occur, it may become necessary to reschedule or cancel break periods. Break time cannot be saved, added to lunch or dinner time or added to any kind of leave. Also, breaks cannot be used to leave work early or to cover for late arrivals.

One half-hour of an employee's own time is allowed for lunch. At the discretion of their supervisors, full-time employees who work an eight-hour shift may take one hour of their own time for their meal period.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.01 (Adopted 9-86/Rev. 7-99)

---

## ii. Introductory Period

Each new employee appointed to a library position must serve a six-month introductory period.

1. Purpose of the Introductory Period. The introductory period allows employees the opportunity to decide if they enjoy working at the Library and want to continue with it. It gives the Library the opportunity to initially evaluate the employee's interest in the job and ability to carry out its requirements effectively. During this period the employee's supervisor will periodically counsel the employee, performing formal evaluation at the end of the third month in a position and again just prior to the end of the six-month introductory period. In no case should completion of the introductory period be interpreted to mean that the library's ability to terminate employees in its sole discretion is in any way restricted after that period. Training and evaluation are on-going processes. The six-month introductory period should not be considered as an employment contract of six months.
2. Procedures For Failing to Successfully Complete. Employees dismissed during the introductory period shall be notified on the same date in which the termination becomes effective. The employee will however be paid through that day except as outlined in SECTION 311.08(3).
3. Promoted or Transferred Employees. A Library employee who has been promoted to a new position at a higher classification must similarly serve a six month introductory period. He/she will be counseled and evaluated as outlined above for new employees. A promoted employee who fails to meet required performance standards may be returned to his/her previous position if still available, or an equivalent position, at his/her previous classification and salary without prejudice.
4. Inter-department transfers from one Library position to another, where no change in classification would result, do not require a formal introductory period with formal performance reviews at specified times. However, an informal trial period may be set to insure that both the employee and his/her supervisor are satisfied with the transfer.
5. Extended Introductory Periods. In special situations, such as absence during the introductory period because of extended sickness or accident by either the supervisor or employee, the introductory period may be extended if an extension is deemed to be in the best interest of both the employee and the Library. The length of any such extension shall be based on the recommendation of the employee's supervisor with the approval of the Human Resources Coordinator and the Deputy Director.
6. Adjustments. Employees in the Introductory Period are treated as any other employees regarding cost of living adjustments and benefits.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.02 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-95)

---

## iii. Promotion During Introductory Period

It is recommended that employees complete their introductory period before applying for promotion or lateral transfer. However, introductory status shall not automatically prohibit an employee from making such an application. Any promotion or transfer awarded an employee during his/her introductory period will require the establishment of a new introductory period of six months effective with the date of the appointment to the new position.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.03 (Adopted 8-86)

---

## iv. Outside Employment

The Library has no objection to employees accepting second jobs unless such jobs have negative effects on the employees' abilities to satisfy the job-related requirements of their positions at the Library or involve the use of confidential information learned directly or indirectly through employment at the Library. Because of scheduling considerations, employees who hold or plan to hold a second job should advise their immediate supervisor. Should outside employment appear to interfere with or prevent an employee from fully discharging the responsibilities of his/her position with the Library, the situation will be called to the attention of the employee with the expectation that adjustments necessary to permit satisfactory service to the Library will be made.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.04 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 9-96)

---

## v. Retirement Age

This policy is under revision.

---

## vi. Exit Interview

It is recommended that exiting employees complete an Exit Interview form (found on the Staff Web) close to their last day of employment and send that to the Human Resources Director. Resigning, retiring or dismissed employees may also elect to participate in an exit interview conducted by a member of the Library's Human Resources Department sometime during the last week of employment. The exit interview is an opportunity for the employee to convey his/her thoughts regarding work experience at the Library and offer any suggestions for improved operations.

The employee may elect to have the content of the exit interview remain confidential or be shared with appropriate other parties.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.06 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7/00)

---

## vii. Attendance

All Library staff members are expected to be punctual and to keep absences and tardiness to a minimum. Employees should be at their workstation on time and ready to begin work at the beginning of each shift. When this is not possible, employees should follow specific guidelines for notification provided by their supervisor or department manager.

Tardiness. Tardiness is defined as any occasion when an employee is expected to have started his/her shift a given time ready to work and is not. . When an employee expects to be late because of illness or an emergency, the employee should notify his/her supervisor before the start of work and give a projected arrival time.

An employee is required to notify the supervisory if the tardiness converts into a day of absence. If the supervisor is not available, contact the next level of supervision so that accommodations can be made to cover the work-station.

Absenteeism. Absenteeism is defined as any absence from an assigned shift(s) which was not requested and approved in advance by the employee's supervisor. Normally, "advance" means on or before the previous day. <em>Excessive absenteeism is defined as two or more occasions per calendar month after an employee’s introductory period.</em>

When an unexpected absence arises because of illness or an emergency, the employee must notify his/her supervisor before the start of work, or if that person is not available, the next level of supervision, so that schedule changes and coverage can be arranged.

<em>Unreported absence is subject to a written warning after one day and will be considered as a resignation (job abandonment) after three consecutive days.</em>

General Provisions. The supervisor is responsible for keeping records of absences and tardiness. Records, however, must be available for review by the employee, the Deputy Directors and Human Resources. <em>Employees who are either tardy or absent during the introductory period will be evaluated on an individual basis. Depending on the circumstances, an employee may be separated during the introductory periods due to absences and/or, tardiness.</em>

Employees who become ill or who must attend to an emergency situation while at work should advise their supervisor before leaving work. If the supervisor is unavailable, the employee should contact the acting supervisor for approval before leaving.

After proper warnings, an employee may be terminated for excessive absenteeism or tardiness even if proper notice of absences and tardiness has been given by telephone or other notification.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.07 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)

---

## viii. Work Rules/Rules of Conduct

The Library expects employees to exhibit regular and prompt attendance and cooperative attitudes and actions. Certain rules of conduct are essentially for fairness, equity and productivity of all personnel.

In addition to pertinent guidelines covered throughout the 300 series, misconduct that will subject employees to discipline up to and including dismissal includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Stealing or attempting to steal the property of the Library, Library users, or Library employees; or intentionally destroying Library property.
2. Accessing, releasing, discussing or misusing privileged or confidential information without prior authorization.
3. Violating the Library's equal employment opportunity guidelines and/or policies on sexual, racial or other harassment or abuse of a fellow worker.
4. Misrepresenting recorded hours worked or intentionally accepting pay for hours not worked.
5. Insubordination: failing to carry out any reasonable order of a superior or verbally abusing a superior.
6. Offensive conduct or language toward the public or fellow employees, including the disregarding of good customer relations.
7. Appearing on library grounds with an unauthorized firearm or weapon.
8. Excessive absenteeism or tardiness. Abuse of sick leave or approved leave-of-absence.
9. Misuse of Library supplies or equipment.
10. Violating substance use policies.

It is recognized that other behavior not specifically covered in the preceding material may warrant discipline up to and including dismissal. Activities not expressly covered in these rules will be handled on a case-by-case basis. All employees are expected to act with good common sense and in a totally professional manner.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.08 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)

---

## ix. Employee Discipline

It is impossible to outline procedures that should be uniformly followed in all instances requiring employee discipline. Further, it is recognized that appropriate disciplinary action always rests within the sound discretion of Library supervisors. Guidelines have been established in the interests of providing supervisors with a basic outline for effective counseling and discipline.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.09 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-91)

---

## x. General Principles and Processing of Disciplinary Actions

1. Library employees have a personal responsibility to meet reasonable standards of performance and behavior.
2. Discipline for sub-standard performance or inappropriate behavior should be corrective rather than punitive. The goal of any disciplinary action is to influence an employee to choose on-the-job behavior that assures effective job performance.
3. Any type of disciplinary action, including immediate suspension or dismissal, may be invoked for serious misconduct.
4. Disciplinary actions may take the form of counseling, written warnings, a decision-making leave, probation and/or dismissal.
5. Because this is a progressive system of discipline, failure to correct or improve after a disciplinary step will cause subsequent discipline to proceed to the next step.
6. In determining the appropriateness of any disciplinary action, legitimate mitigating factors should be taken into account. Common mitigating considerations include, but shall not be limited to, length of service, previous work record, awareness of rules violated, impact of conduct on operations and/or the library's handling of the offense.
7. In a disciplinary session, the supervisor should:
   - Determine and note what occurred, define inappropriate behavior, clearly state facts regarding the misconduct or failure to meet job requirements.
   - Meet with employee in private with goal of gaining employee's agreement to solve problem.
   - Point out specific work rule violations, sub-standard area(s) of performance or other behavior warranting counseling.
   - Hear employee's explanations.
   - Outline the desired behavior required, when it is required and why.
   - Advise the employee of the next step if performance or desired behavior does not occur.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.10 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-91)

---

## xi. Pre-Discipline/Disciplinary Practices

1. Counseling. Informal verbal counseling is recommended as a step to be taken prior to formal written discipline. Such counseling and related documentation should establish a baseline for acceptable and desired performance. A written summary of the counseling session should be drawn up and a copy given to the employee. Unless followed up by subsequent disciplinary action, a record of the counseling will not become a part of the employee's official personnel records as discipline.
2. Initial Written Warning. When informal counseling has failed to produce sustained satisfactory performance or when informal counseling is determined to be an inappropriate first step in dealing with sub-standard performance or inappropriate behavior, the next step is to hold a formal discussion with the employee and issue a formal initial warning, in written form using either a memo or Discipline Action Form. Given individual circumstances, not all situations requiring employee discipline will follow the same progression. However, in most instances a written initial warning should be preceded by counseling. The warning will document the discussion with a statement including the supervisor's account of circumstances, the employee's version, agreed-upon plan for improvement, signatures of both parties and a statement advising the employee of what action will be taken if he/she fails to improve. Also, the supervisor should give the employee a copy of the written statement and advise him/her that this is the first formal step of discipline and a copy will be placed in the personnel file.
3. Advanced Written Warning. An employee receives an advanced written warning, usually after an initial written warning has been given. In some cases, the severity of an infraction may merit an advanced written warning even when other steps have not been taken in the disciplinary process. At the time of the advanced written warning, an employee may be placed in a probationary period when it appears to management that the guidelines or description of the employee's expected standards of performance are unclear. Probationary periods will not exceed 60 days in length and may be divided in 2 week increments in which specific goals must be met.
4. Decision-Making Leave. If the date set for reviewing performance has arrived and the employee is found to be incapable or unwilling to perform satisfactorily, he or she may be placed on a paid, one-day decision-making leave, upon the advice of Human Resources. In some cases, a decision-making leave may be the first step of discipline. In other circumstances a decision-making leave may not be considered appropriate. In administering a decision-making leave, the supervisor should:
   - Inform the employee of the Decision-Making Leave and explain that continued employment with the Library subsequent to the leave is conditional upon the employee's decision to solve the problem and make a total commitment to acceptable performance on the job.
   - Instruct the employee to return after the decision-making leave and report directly to the supervisor with his/her decision to either change and stay with the Library or quit and find more satisfying work elsewhere. Any decision other than the decision to stay with the Library and make all necessary changes will result in immediate dismissal.
   - Document the discussion in writing, including agreed-upon action plan and provide signatures of both parties.
   - Give copy to employee and forward copy through appropriate supervisory channels to Human Resources to file in employee's personnel records.
5. To Grieve Discipline. If at any stage in disciplinary proceedings an employee feels his/her supervisor is unjustly attempting to apply discipline, he/she may call for a hearing. To obtain a hearing, an employee should follow procedures set out in Section 322.01 (Grievance and/or Complaint Resolution Procedure) of this manual.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.11 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-99)

---

## xii. Dismissal

It may be necessary to dismiss an employee who does not adapt to the policies of the Kansas City Public Library or meet performance standards. In most instances such action shall be taken only after the employee has been warned in writing about his/her performance or conduct. The "Discipline/Counseling Statement" form may be used to facilitate this process. It will normally be signed by the supervisor and acknowledged or signed by the employee, then added to the staff member's personnel file. The employee will receive a copy.

Severance Pay. Staff members who have been employed by the Library for at least one year will be given two week's pay, dismissal effective immediately (unless terminated for gross misconduct). Terminated employees are to leave the Library immediately.

Gross Misconduct. In some extreme circumstances, an employee may be dismissed without warning and with no severance pay, for example: in cases of violation of the law, willful destruction of property, falsification of application, or similar serious infractions.

Hearing Process. To protect individual rights, the employee may ask for a hearing with the Library Director. Such request should be in writing to the Director within five calendar days after dismissal notice is given. The Library Director's decision shall be administratively binding.

---

Administrative Procedure 311.12 (Adopted 8-85/Rev. 7-99)
