# 313 Miscellaneous

## i. Library System Closings for Inclement Conditions

Generally, the Library will not close for inclement weather conditions. Information concerning any closing of the Library will be given via Library Website, Library email, Library weather hotline 816.701.3599; and over social media. In addition, supervisors are responsible for keeping an accurate contact list of employees to be used in case of a library closing. If employees are unable to obtain the information, they should call their supervisor for the latest information. Determination of whether to close the Library will be made by the Library Director, or designee. If no notice is given, it is assumed that the Library will be open as usual.

---

Administrative Procedure 313.01 (Adopted 8-6/Rev. 7-00, 02-19)

---

## ii. Committee/Task Force Participation

The Library encourages staff interaction and development through involvement in committees, work/user groups and task forces. Frequently, participation in such group activities may be a function of the staff member's position, while participation in other activities may be voluntary.

Employees must obtain the approval of their immediate supervisor before committing to any in-house group activities and must have the additional approval of their Deputy Director for activities, committees, etc., outside of the Library.

Participation is open to the entire staff, but employees interested in voluntary activities should check with their supervisors before making a commitment to ensure that supervisors can provide the necessary flexibility in scheduling.

The intended purpose of the committee/task force structure is to:

1. improve overall communication and increase interdepartmental interaction;
2. increase the number of opportunities for staff from all levels of the Library to participate in skill development and continuing education;
3. enable staff to develop group interaction and leadership skills; and to
4. provide an opportunity for greater staff participation in decision making.

---

Administrative Procedure 313.02 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 9-96)

---

## iii. Staff Association

This procedure is under revision.

---

Administrative Procedure 313.03 (Adopted 8-86)

---

## iv. First Aid

First aid kits are available at all Library locations. Aid for more serious injuries falls under Workers Compensation provisions and immediate attention should be obtained in accordance with those guidelines. Should an employee become severely ill at work, first aid should be limited to making the employee comfortable until such time that he or she is able to leave the premises with or without assistance.

---

Administrative Procedure 313.05 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)

---

## vi. Retirement and Related Parties

"Sponsored" parties are defined as those in which funding is available from the Library's Activity Fund. Staff contributions, proceeds from vending machines and other donations finance the Activity Fund.

Regular full or part-time status employees are eligible to be honored with a Library sponsored retirement party if he or she meets certain criteria. Criteria includes the employee meeting or exceeding the "rule of 75," (meaning age and years of service combined equal 75) AND the recipient has been employed with the Library for at least 10 years.

For employees who do not meet the above criteria, the individual's department or branch may choose to honor the person with its own gift and/or party for such things as resignations, birthdays, etc. Lunch and break times may be utilized for this purpose.

Holiday celebratory parties "sponsored" by the Library shall also fall within financial guidelines set annually by the Library Director and the Finance Director.

---

Administrative Procedure 313.06 (Adopted 12-87/Rev. 9-99)

---

## vii. Agents and Salespersons

Agents and salespersons on other than Library business are not allowed to transact business with staff members during work time.

---

Administrative Procedure 313.07 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-91)

## viii. Temporary Remote Work Policy 

In the event of an emergency such as a lasting weather disaster or pandemic, Kansas City Public Library (referred to hereafter as KCPL) may allow or require employees to temporarily work from home or at a different location to ensure business continuity. 

Procedures:

In the event of an emergency, KCPL may require certain employees to work remotely. These employees will be advised of such requirements by the department manager. Preparations should be made by employees and managers well in advance to allow remote work in emergency circumstances. This includes appropriate equipment needs, such as hardware, software, phone and data lines. The IS department is available to review these equipment needs and to provide support to employees in advance of emergency remote work situations. The Remote Work Agreement not required in exigent circumstances.

KCPL Directors will determine which of their direct reports could work remotely based on job duties, equipment needs, workspace design considerations and scheduling issues. The remote work agreement requests should be submitted to HR for final approval via email.

If approved, the remote work agreement will be signed by the employee, their manager, and an HR representative. 

Once approved for remote working, the employee will establish an appropriate work environment within their home or alternate location for work purposes. KCPL will not be responsible for costs associated with the setup of the employee's home office, such as remodeling, furniture or lighting, nor for repairs or modifications to the home office space.

KCPL will determine the equipment needs for each employee on a case-by-case basis. Equipment supplied by the organization is to be used for business purposes only. 

Consistent with the organization's expectations of information security for employees working at the office, employees working remotely will be expected to ensure the protection of organizational, employee and  customer information accessible from their home or alternate office. 

Employees should not assume any specified period of time for emergency remote work arrangements, and KCPL may require employees to return to regular, in-office work at any time.

Administrative Procedure 313.08 (Adopted 5-20)

---
