# 315 Personnel Files

The Library shall establish and maintain a personnel file for each paid full-time and part-time employee including temporary staff. Personnel files shall contain an employee's original application for employment, basic identifying information, employment references, resume, job description, appointment letter, applicable employment test results, salary and salary change information, performance evaluations, records related to education and training, awards and honors, letters of commendation, disciplinary records, pertinent medical records and any other records deemed necessary to the effective administration, development and employment of the Library's human resources. Objective and adequate documentation for personnel administration purposes shall be the standard for determining each employee's personnel file contents.

---

Board Policy 315 (Adopted 7-89)

---

## 315.01. Personnel File Maintenance

Personnel files shall be consistently maintained according to sound personnel practice and current legal requirements to assure that they are accurate, relevant and safe from improper disclosure. File maintenance shall be the responsibility of Human Resources. Library supervisors shall be responsible for supplying file copies of pertinent records originating with them.

It is essential that staff members report any changes affecting their personnel records without delay. Employees should notify Human Resources, as well as their immediate supervisors, of any changes in home address, telephone number, name, marital status, number of dependents or other relevant personal data. Incorrect information may cause problems concerning taxes, benefits or other important matters. Human Resources reserves the right to ask for documentation for certain changes.

---

Administrative Procedure 315.01 (Adopted 12-88/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 315.02. Retention of Records

The Library shall permanently retain all personnel and medical records for current and former Library employees with the following exceptions:

Outside Requests for Information—Prior 2 years

Formal Employment References—Duration of employment

Diplomas and Transcripts—Duration of employment/Discard

Garnishments and Child Support Orders—Prior 2 years

The employment applications of external candidates who have not been hired shall be retained for 12 months/1 year after the initial date of application.

---

Administrative Procedure 315.02 (Adopted 12-88/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 315.03. Internal Access to Records

All paper personnel files shall be kept in a secure area in Human Resources and shall be locked when unattended. Direct access to personnel records shall be limited to authorized individuals within the Human Resources Department. Electronic records shall be maintained by staff in Human Resources with direct access limited to authorized personnel.

Managers and supervisors considering current employees for position openings, will have access to specific records on a need-to-know basis upon request to Human Resources.

No changes may be made to information contained in personnel files without authorization from the Library Director or Human Resources. Employees will be made aware of any changes not self-initiated with the exception of confidential management documents as described in Section 315.05.

All materials contained in paper personnel files must be dated and signed by appropriate parties, especially salary changes and performance reviews.

Personnel files are not normally allowed out of the Human Resources Department unless required for legal proceedings; whenever possible copies will be made for this purpose.

---

Administrative Procedure 315.03 (Adopted 12-88/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 315.04. External Access to Records

Any contact from external sources requesting information contained in a current or former employee's personnel file must receive written clearance from the employee or former employee before any information will be released by the Library.

The only exceptions are:

1. Requests to verify the employment of active employees.
2. A positive response to verify salary to legitimate credit source inquiries. (In complying with these two types of requests, "directory information" may be included if asked for. "Directory information" is limited to dates of employment and job title.)
3. Requests from law enforcement officials concerning an employee's dates of attendance and home address.
4. Compliance with subpoenas.
5. In the exercise of the Library's responsibilities as an employer, employment information including earnings and other compensation may be disclosed to governmental agencies or others to assure compliance with laws and rules and to verify employment information relating to valid requests for that information from governmental agencies.

Normally, requests for additional information regarding former employees such as a summary of job duties, reason for termination or eligibility for rehire will not be answered. Unique requests should be directed to the Director of Human Resources.

---

Administrative Procedure 315.04 (Adopted 12-88/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 315.05. Employee Access to Personnel Files

Employees and former employees (with a written request) have the right to inspect and copy most information contained in their personnel files. Individuals will be given access to their files only in the presence of authorized staff and at a mutually convenient time and place. Copies of documents or complete files will be provided on a fee basis when requested in writing and with adequate timing. Requests may be made by non-active employees or proper representatives of employees and former employees. The Director of Human Resources and the Library's Executive Director reserve the right to remove certain sensitive information including items related to ongoing security or criminal investigations, supporting documentation regarding legal proceedings and other confidential management documents before granting access to the file.

Individuals who question the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in their files should bring such matters to the attention of management in writing. The Human Resources Director, in consultation with the employee's supervisor, when appropriate, will consider the employee's objections and correct or remove erroneous or improper information. If management makes the decision to retain the disputed information in the file, the employee is entitled to place a brief statement in the record identifying the alleged errors or inaccuracies.

---

Administrative Procedure 315.05 (Adopted 12-88/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 315.06. Other Records

The Library maintains records in addition to those described in previous sections of the 315 series that are not maintained in open employee personnel files. Following is a list of those records, location and appropriate retention period.

Exit interviews—Human Resources Department—One year after termination date

Payroll records—Finance Department—Indefinite/Indefinite

Attendance/time records—Finance Department—Indefinite/Indefinite

INS I-9 forms—Human Resources Department—Duration of employment/with employment file.

Interview records—Human Resources Department—12 months from date of application

Health insurance forms—Human Resources Department—Duration of employment/discard

Medical records—Human Resources Department—Indefinite/Indefinite

---

Administrative Procedure 315.06 (Adopted 12-88/Rev. 12-02)
