# 320 Resignation

All employees shall submit a resignation in writing to his or her supervisor who will then forward it to the Human Resources Coordinator. Professional employees shall give at least four weeks' notice. All others shall give a minimum of two weeks' notice. Employees who are eligible to retire and planning to do so are expected to give sixty days' notice. Except at the discretion of the Library Director, vacation or other recognized leave shall not be considered as part of the notice period.

An employee who fails to give adequate notice may have the notation "resignation accepted with prejudice due to inadequate notice" placed on permanent record in his or her personnel file. Failure to give adequate notice may be sufficient grounds to deny an applicant consideration for re-employment at a later date.

An employee who fails to report for duty or to provide the Library with a suitable reason for such absence shall be considered to have resigned after three working days.

---

Library Board Policy 320 (Adopted 8-85)

---

## 320.01. Resignation Procedure

Notice of resignation may be submitted with a written letter and/or electronic mail from a known e-mail address. Resignations should be considered as "accepted" with no further written correspondence from the Library except as may be included as part of a C.O.B.R.A. notice.

Employees are expected to maintain a high degree of productivity during their notice period. The resignation notice period should be used to complete open projects or to prepare one's successor to continue with one's work without severe interruption. In addition, this time should be used to document in writing all practices and procedures and to develop training guides used in one's position or job.

---

Administrative Procedure 320.01 (Adopted 12-02)
