# 321 Grievances and/or Complaints

The Library Director shall establish administrative procedures to deal effectively and equitably with any employee grievance or complaint. Such procedures shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Trustees. Ideally grievance or complaint issues should be resolved to the mutual satisfaction of all parties at the lowest level of supervision. When this is not possible, the established grievance or complaint procedure shall be followed. Nothing in the grievance or complaint resolution procedure shall preclude the individual from seeking other legal remedies, including appeal to the policy making authority of the Library Board.

---

Library Board Policy 322 (Adopted 9-89)

---

## i. Grievance and/or Complaint Resolution Procedure

If an employee has good cause to believe that he or she has been treated or disciplined unfairly or in a manner inconsistent with Library policy, the following procedure should be utilized to achieve fair and equitable resolution of the matter at the lowest possible supervisory or administrative level.

Step 1: The employee should discuss the situation with her/his immediate supervisor who will attempt to resolve the matter within the framework of established policy, and administrative procedure.

Step 2: If the employee's supervisor is unable to resolve the problem, the employee has the right to have her/his problem informally reviewed by the next level of supervision.

Step 3: If the matter is still unresolved to the satisfaction of the employee, she/he may file a formal grievance or complaint. The grievance must be filed in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the event or occurrence giving rise to the alleged grievance took place or within thirty (30) calendar days from the date on which the employee should have reasonably known of its occurrence.

The written grievance must include (1) a statement of the specific problem and/or complaint; (2) the Library policy violated or a statement as to why the employee feels the situation represents unfair or inequitable treatment; (3) all facts relevant to the problem and/or complaint; (4) a recommended solution; and (5) evidence establishing that all reasonable informal avenues to achieve a solution have been attempted. A copy must be forwarded to the Director of Human Resources at the time it is filed.

Step 4: The formal written grievance must be submitted to the appropriate Deputy Director within the time frame outlined in Step 3. The Deputy Director will conduct any necessary interviews and respond in writing to the grievance within five (5) working days from the date of receipt.

Step 5: If Step 4 does not resolve the grievance to the employee's satisfaction, the employee may appeal the decision within five (5) working days to the Library Director. The appeal must include a copy of the original grievance and any subsequent communication or documentation, including the written response from the Deputy Director. The Director will respond to the appeal in writing within five (5) working days from the date of receipt of the appeal and the Director's decision shall be administratively binding.

All employees of the Library are entitled to the above enumerated due process steps and fair consideration of their viewpoint under this procedure. No reprisals of any kind will be taken against any employee for participating in the grievance process.

---

Administrative Procedure 322.01 (Adopted 10-89/Rev. 7-99)
