# 605. Promotional Materials

The Library shall produce and distribute to the public through effective methods, newsletters, brochures and other promotional materials which will communicate the availability of Library services.

---

Board Policy 605 (Adopted 5-90)

---

## 605.01. Distribution of Community Materials

As a service to the public, the Library will display and distribute informational and promotional materials deemed to be of public interest from both non-profit and for-profit organizations. Materials produced by for-profit organizations will be distributed if the organization regularly promotes Library programs or if Library customers demonstrate an interest in the material. It is the responsibility of the organization to provide materials for distribution and to replace supplies as needed. Materials are available only for customer pick-up. They will not be mailed or otherwise distributed by the Library. All materials displayed within the Library should be presented in an attractive and tasteful manner. Questions pertaining to the suitability of materials should be referred to the Director of Marketing. The Library Executive Director will make all final decisions about materials which may not clearly fall within existing guidelines. Staff will remove date sensitive materials from display racks and tables weekly and retain existing materials on a space available basis. Materials will usually not be distributed for longer than one month.

---

Administrative Procedure 605.01 (Adopted 10-92/Rev. 4-98)

---

## 605.02. Availability of Auxiliary Aids, Services and Equipment

All printed materials promoting the Library's programs, services and activities shall include a statement informing individuals with disabilities that auxiliary aids and services will be provided if they notify the Library Office at least 24 hours prior to the event. Telephone and TDD numbers shall be clearly indicated on all promotional materials.

---

Administrative Procedure 605.01 (Adopted 12-94)
