# 608. Meeting Rooms and Other Facilities

Consistent with the Library Bill of Rights, the Library shall make its meeting rooms and exhibit spaces available to the public on an equitable basis, regardless of the beliefs or affiliations of individuals or groups requesting their use.

While the Library encourages the use of its facilities for political events which involve discussion and debate of ideas and public policies, the Library does not permit the use of its facilities for political fundraising events.

---

Board Policy 608 (Adopted 5-90/Rev. 9-07)

---

## 608.01. Meeting Room Availability

Library meeting rooms and other spaces will be available for use by the community. The Library reserves the right to review each prospective use and determine whether that use meets Kansas City Public Library meeting room and facility guidelines. Various facilities and meeting rooms will be available for use before and/or after regular Library hours. Fees will apply; see the Meeting Room and Staff Requirement fee schedule for rates.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.01 (Adopted 10-92/Rev. 1-02)

---

## 608.02. Reservation Priority

The Library has first priority on all dates. The Library also has the right to preempt any event for Library use. In such rare instances, the Library will make every reasonable effort to assist the group in reserving another date or Library facility or meeting room.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.02 (Adopted 10-92/Rev. 1-02)

---

## 608.03. Use Guidelines

Meeting rooms are not intended to be used for regular, consecutive meetings by clubs or organizations since such use prohibits general availability to the public. Facilities and meeting rooms may be booked for up to four consecutive gatherings; longer booking periods are possible for classes and programs that have been approved in advance by a branch manager or the Special Events Coordinator at Central Library. The Library will also determine the number of events to be held simultaneously.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.03 (Adopted 10-92/Rev. 1-02)

---

## 608.04. Group/Library Responsibilities

A completed and signed Kansas City Public Library Application for Use of Meeting Rooms and Facilities must be submitted by all applicants planning to use a facility, meeting room or other space. A hold or tentative reservation on a facility, meeting room or other space can be made if there is space available. When a fee is involved, the tentative reservation is subject to cancellation if the applicant does not respond to the 45-day deadline to submit room and/or staff fees.

The group sponsoring the gathering will be responsible for the orderly conduct of the group and for any damage to Library property, equipment and/or exhibits. The individual initiating the original request for meeting room space, or the facilitator of the event, will be considered the official representative of the group and will assume the responsibility for communicating Library guidelines to the group.

All persons, groups or organizations using Library facilities take the premises "as is" and assume all risks of injury, including death or property damage, to members of the group, organization, event participants and event spectators which might arise out of activities or out of conditions present on the facilities and groups.

There should be no charges, fees or solicitations for meeting attendees. Exceptions would be sponsoring groups that are nonprofit organizations or educational institutions for approved classes, seminars or similar activities. Questions should be referred to the Special Events Coordinator or appropriate Deputy Director for approval.

Meeting rooms will have a standard configuration of chairs/tables (often auditorium style). In spaces with moveable furniture, rearranging chairs/tables (and returning them to the original arrangement) will be the responsibility of the group using them.

When requested in advance, the Library will provide needed audiovisual equipment dependent on its availability at the requested site.

Food and beverage may be served if approved in advance. (See Food and Beverage section of Guidelines for Use of Meeting Rooms and Facilities for terms.) The group serving will be responsible for clean-up.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.04 (Adopted 10-92/Rev. 1-01)

---

## 608.05. Fees

Room fees and staffing requirement fees vary depending on the requested facility, nature of event, staff involved and requested rental equipment. See the Meeting Room and Staff Requirement fee schedules for specific rates. Some room and facility use may qualify for the waiving of rental fees. See Guidelines for Use of Meeting Rooms and Facilities for those exceptions.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.05 (Adopted 10-92/Rev. 1-01)

---

## 608.06. Displays and Exhibits

Display cases and areas within the Library will be available to promote both community and Library related interests. Branch managers are responsible for coordinating displays at their locations; the Main Associate Director or designee will coordinate displays at Main except for the entrance windows, which will be scheduled by the Marketing Department. Displays will usually be housed for one month. Major exhibits will be scheduled and programmed through the Marketing Department's Program Services Officer at sites throughout the system with the approval of the site supervisor.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.06 (Adopted 10-92)

---

## 608.07. Complementary Programming

Complementary programming should be planned by all locations to support and publicize major exhibits scheduled by the Marketing Department. When possible, programs and exhibits should incorporate community groups for support and expanded library market potential; partnerships with such organizations are highly desirable goals for all sites.

---

Administrative Procedure 608.07 (Adopted 10-92)
