# 612. Fund Raising Development

The Chief Executive shall be responsible for working with the Board, the Staff and the community to establish formal channels for soliciting and receiving gifts and grants as part of an ongoing development program.

---

Board Policy 612 (Adopted 5-90/Rev. 7-07)

---

## 612.01. Donor Recognition Opportunities

As part of its on-going fund raising and development program, the Library will offer donor recognition opportunities which will include options for commemorative naming of facilities, areas within facilities, equipment and furnishings, collections, named endowments or funds, etc. In consultation with the Board of Trustees, the Library Executive Director will establish and periodically update a listing of such donor recognition opportunities. General guidelines are as follows:

1. Donor Recognition Through Named Facilities or Areas Within Facilities. Policies, procedures and guidelines for this option are detailed in sections 418 and 419 of the Policy and Procedure Manual.
2. Named Collections or Departments. At the discretion of the Board of Trustees and upon the recommendation and advice of the Library Executive Director and staff, an existing department or collection may be named as designated by a donor for a contribution to the Library's endowment fund that will provide earnings equivalent to: half of a department's current operating budget; or half of the current annual acquisitions budget for a specific collection. The minimum contribution for a named collection will be \$100,000.
3. Commemorative Equipment or Furnishings. Commemorative options for the purchase of equipment, shelving, furniture, fixtures, etc. are available to donors for 100% of the actual cost. In the event that such items have already been purchased out of Library funds, a contribution of an equivalent amount of the Library endowment will earn the donor the desired commemorative opportunity.
4. Named Endowment Funds. For a minimum endowment contribution of \$10,000, a commemorative fund will be established within the Library's endowment with annual earnings from the fund used to benefit a specific collection, program or facility as designated by the donor. Such designations, however, must be consistent with the current or anticipated collections, programs or projects as established by the Library.
5. Endowment Plaque. Endowment gifts of $2,500 or more will be acknowledged on a perpetual plaque which will hang at the Main Library. If such gift is made in the name of a group, husband and wife, or a family, that name may be used in lieu of an individual citation. Multiple individual names, however, require gifts of $2,500 each for such inscribed acknowledgement.
6. Memorials. Memorial gifts will be accepted and acknowledgement cards sent to the surviving family member specified by the donor. When memorial contributions honoring an individual reach an aggregate amount of \$500 or more, the name of that individual will be inscribed on a Memorial Plaque which will hang at the Main Library.

---

Administrative Procedure 612.01 (Adopted 2-91)
