# 615. Third Party Public Outreach

In accordance with the Library Goal for Community Relations and the Library Bill of Rights of the American Library Association, which affirms that all libraries are forums for information and ideas, third party public outreach, including the collection of signatures for ballot initiatives, may occur on the property of or within the facilities of The Kansas City Public Library. The Chief Executive shall develop procedures governing the time, place, and manner of such activity, remembering that quiet enjoyment of the Library is the right of all patrons.

---

Board Policy 615 (Adopted 6-2009)

---

## i. Outreach Requests

A request to use a Library facility or facilities for third party public outreach should be made to the respective branch director or manager.

---

Administrative Procedure 615.01 (Adopted 6-2009)

---

## ii. Limits on Third Party Public Outreach Activities

In keeping with the Library’s commitment to customer service and the provision of a safe and inviting atmosphere, as well as unimpeded access, the respective Library director or manager may set limits on the time allowed for third party public outreach, the number of people participating in this activity at any one time, the display of materials or presentation of petitions, and the places where this activity may occur.

---

Administrative Procedure 615.02 (Adopted 6-2009)

---

## iii. Compliance with Guidelines

Any individual involved in third party outreach will be expected to comply with any and all guidelines for behavior and not to engage in any activity in violation of Federal, State, local, or other applicable law, or Library policy.

---

Administrative Procedure 615.03 (Adopted 6-2009)
