# 312 Employee Conduct

## 312.01. Public Relations

All staff who have person-to-person or other contact with the public are required to deal with customers in a pleasant, courteous and business-like manner. Reliable guidelines for good public relations include, but are not limited to, responding promptly, cordially greeting visitors, addressing customers by name when possible, giving one's own first or last name when requested and in general making an effort to make the customer's contact with the Library a pleasant one.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.01 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 312.02. Telephone Courtesy

The Library considers telephone service to be as important a public service as any other business conducted. Guidelines include a prompt response, distinct diction, pleasant voice, identification of one's department, provision of one's first or last name if requested and minimizing the amount of time a caller is on hold. All are considered necessary elements in meeting Library expectations.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.02 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-95)

---

## 312.03. Closing Procedures

Staff at the Main Library and all branches should be scheduled as late as their services are likely to be required. Staff may begin turning lights out at closing time in areas where there are no customers. A few minutes before closing, staff should go through the Library and help customers finish finding materials. No customer should be turned away from the Library until closing time.

Staff should be responsive to customers who are just coming into the Library and need something special. Staff should help customers who are in the Library past closing time in a courteous fashion. For security reasons, employees should include safety and security procedures in their individual department or location closing procedures.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.03 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 312.04. Reporting Accidents

Any employee or customer accident occurring on Library property (or in the line of duty by an employee who may be off Library property) must be reported within 24 hours to the appropriate Deputy Director, the Director and the Finance Office (and Human Resources Director for employee accidents) giving the person's name, place and time of accident, how it occurred and names of witnesses. Good judgment should be exercised in calling for appropriate outside emergency assistance (9ll). Accidents resulting in severe injury to an employee or customer must be verbally reported immediately with a written report within 24 hours. An Incident Form is required for all accidents.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.04 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-98)

---

## 312.05. Dress

Employees serve as representatives of the Kansas City Public Library and therefore must present a professional appearance while on duty. Work attire should be appropriate to the individual's work responsibilities, work location, and position.

<strong>Appropriate dress guidelines:</strong>

<strong>Shirts:</strong> Shirts should project a professional appearance. Shirts with Library related logos are appropriate. Unacceptable attire includes tank top, shirt or blouse which is torn or transparent; and t-shirts or shirts with large logos or slogans.

<strong>Slacks:</strong> Dress slacks or khakis are preferred. Jeans may not be appropriate for all positions interacting with patrons and the public, however, if approved they are to be neat, clean, and without holes or rips. Shorts are not appropriate.

<strong>Skirts/Dresses:</strong> Appropriate length is required.

<strong>Shoes:</strong> For safety reasons, staff who lift and move items should protect feet by wearing closed toe shoes. Flip flops are not acceptable attire.

<strong>Caps:</strong> visors, hats, and bandanas are not permissible except for employees working outside.

The immediate supervisor is responsible to ensure that employee attire is appropriate to the individual's work activities, and may instruct employees who do not meet the standards of the dress code to take corrective action.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.05 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-98/Rev. 9-15)

---

## 312.06. Eating

Eating in public areas is restricted during work time and generally discouraged. Because the presence of food can cause damage and be detrimental to the building and its collections by encouraging vermin, eating is usually confined to designated eating areas such as employee lounges or kitchens. Special permission may be granted by the employee's supervisor for special occasions. Proper cleaning up is required in all cases.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.06 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 12-02)

---

## 312.07. Smoking

Smoking is prohibited in the Library, in Library vehicles, and in Library entranceways and areas.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.07 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-99)

---

## 312.08. Drug and Alcohol use

Employee Expectations. Employees are expected and required to report to work on time and in appropriate mental and physical condition for work. It is our intent and obligation to provide a drug free, healthful, safe and secure work environment.

Reporting. Employees must, as a condition of employment, report any conviction under a criminal drug statute for violations occurring on or off Library premises while conducting library business. A report of a conviction must be made within five (5) days after the conviction. (This requirement is mandated by the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988).

Prohibitions. The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of a controlled substance on library premises or while conducting library business off library premises is absolutely prohibited. Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination, and may have legal consequences.

Testing.

1. When in the Library's judgment, there is reasonable suspicion that an employee has reported to work or is working impaired as a result of the use of drugs, controlled substances or alcohol, the employee may be required to submit to screening.
2. Employees involved in a management referral to the Employee Assistance Program in which substance use is involved as a primary or secondary issue, may be required to submit to screening periodically as a condition of continued employment.
3. Refusal to submit to substance screening will be considered an act of insubordination and may result in termination.

Screening Results. The screening of all urine and blood samples submitted in accordance with this policy will be performed by qualified and certified testing laboratories. The test results will be reviewed to determine if there is evidence of the use of drugs, controlled substances or alcohol. The test results will be treated in strict confidence. The laboratory will advise the Library only whether the test results were positive (indicative of the presence of drugs, controlled substances or alcohol) or negative. No test results will be released to any other party without the written authorization of the employee who was screened.

Employees who have positive test results will be required to be assessed by a substance abuse professional approved or provided by the Library, and shall complete any recommended treatment. Refusal to undergo an assessment, to comply with treatment recommendations, or to follow through with treatment will result in disciplinary action up to and including discharge.

Employee Assistance Program. The Library recognizes that drug and alcohol dependency is a treatable health problem. Employees needing assistance in dealing with such a problem are encouraged to consult with their manager and/or Human Resources to obtain information on the availability of resources, treatment clinics and programs.

Employees who seek assistance through the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) will not be disciplined for doing so. However, it is the employee's responsibility to seek assistance before they have become subject to discipline for a violation of the drug and alcohol abuse policy.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.08 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 9-96)

---

## 312.09. Personal Use of Library Equipment

Library telephones, copiers, fax machines, personal computers and other office equipment and communication media are intended for Library business. Use of this equipment for personal communication (including telefacsimile and e-mail) should be extremely limited and employees are responsible for any associated fees, costs or charges. Such personal use should never occur from a public service desk.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.09 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-95)

---

## 312.10. Use of Staff Time

Library employees are expected to devote time on the job entirely to their assigned responsibilities. Personal conversations, personal e-mail use, telephone conversations, performance of duties related to other organizations or interests should be conducted during breaks or lunch and dinner periods only. Inappropriate use of staff time may result in disciplinary action.

---

Administrative Procedure 312.10 (Adopted 8-86/Rev. 7-00)
