# 533. Construction of Facilities

All contracts for facility construction projects, the cost of which exceeds $100,000, shall be let to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder or bidders based on pre-established criteria after notice and publication of an advertisement for five days in a daily newspaper in the District, or at least twice over a period of ten days or more in a newspaper in the District is located and in one daily newspaper in the state which does not have less than fifty thousand daily circulation and by such other means as determined to be most likely to reach potential bidders. For all contracts for projects between $25,000 and \$100,000, a minimum of three contractors shall be solicited with the award being made to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder based on pre-established criteria. (Ref. 8.250 RSMo)

The number of such public bids shall not be restricted or curtailed, but shall be open to all persons complying with the terms upon which the bids are requested or solicited unless debarred for cause. No contract shall be awarded when the amount appropriated for same is not sufficient to complete the work ready for service. (Ref. 8.250 RSMo)

When contracting for the purpose of constructing, repairing or remodeling facilities, and purchases of tangible property and materials to be incorporated into or consumed in the construction of the project are to be made on a tax-exempt basis, the Library shall furnish to the contractor an exemption certificate authorizing such purchases for the construction, repair or remodeling project. (Ref. 144.062 RSMo)

---

Board Policy 533 (Adopted 2-90/Rev. 6-11)
