# 535. Credit Card Policy

To provide a more efficient means of making routine purchases and payment by reducing paperwork and streamlining the purchasing cycle, the Library Director may authorize through a financial institution provider the issuance of Library credit cards. The credit cards will be used for appropriate Library business use only.

The Library Director shall establish and maintain procedures and forms for implementing and monitoring the credit card purchasing program.

Credit card purchases shall be substantiated by itemized receipts obtained by the individual to whom the card is issued, and all uses will be appropriately documented with the business purpose of the transaction. Library credit cards will not be used for personal expenditures.

Payment for credit card purchases shall be made on or before the balance due date.

In the event a credit card is lost or stolen, the cardholder/employee shall immediately notify the issuing bank and the Finance Department.

Final responsibility for judicious use of a Library credit card rests with the individual to whom the card is entrusted. Any violation of this policy will be investigated and could result in termination and/or criminal prosecution.

Employees must immediately surrender the credit card to the Finance Department upon leaving the employ of the Library. The Finance Department will notify the issuing bank to cancel the credit card.

---

Board Policy 535 (Adopted 6-08)

---

## 535.01. Procedures for Use of Library Credit Cards

<strong>A. OBTAINING CREDIT CARDS</strong>

Employees approved for a Library Credit card by the Library Director or designee will be required to sign a receipt acknowledgment form indicating receipt of the card and acceptance of the policy and procedures for credit card use. Training will be provided when the card is received.

<strong>B. AUTHORIZED CARD USE</strong>

Cardholders are authorized to use the card to purchase merchandise or services required as a function of their duties at the Library.

Purchases made via the credit card must comply with the Library’s purchasing procedures. Violations of the Library Credit Card Policies and Procedures may result in revocation of use privileges, disciplinary action including restitution to the Library for unauthorized purchases, termination of employment and criminal prosecution.

<strong>C. UNAUTHORIZED AND/OR INAPPROPRIATE CARD USE</strong>

Unauthorized and/or inappropriate card use includes, but is not limited to:

1. Items of personal use;
2. Items for non-library purposes;
3. Cash or cash advances;
4. Gift cards, unless approved in advance by Library Director;
5. Food and beverages for an individual employee, other than when the employee is in approved overnight travel status, or when an employee is attending a business meeting/event on behalf of the Library;
6. Fixed/Capitalized Assets;
7. Leases/Rentals requiring a signed agreement;
8. Software Licensing requiring a signed agreement; and
9. Professional and Consulting Services.

<strong>D. TRANSACTIONS REQUIRING SPECIAL DOCUMENTATION OR APPROVAL</strong>

1. <em>Alcoholic Beverages</em>—At times there are legitimate expenditures for alcohol related to the promotion of the Library’s interests. A statement explaining how this expenditure benefits the Library must be provided.
2. <em>Dues</em>—Use of Library funds for organization memberships and dues may be permitted for institutional memberships in organizations that provide educational or professional service of value to the Library. Generally, Library funds may not be used to pay individual personal membership dues, unless needed to discharge Library responsibilities, or which provide educational, professional and other services of value to the Library. The purpose of the membership, the complete name of the organization and the name of the member should be clearly documented on the credit card log.
3. <em>Business Meals / Catering Services / Food for Library Events</em>—If food is purchased for a Library sponsored event/meeting and fewer than 10 people are attending, the names of those people must be listed on, or attached in memo form to, the credit card log. If 10 or more people are in attendance only the group name is necessary. The business purpose of the event/meeting must also be provided.

<strong>E. CREDIT CARD SECURITY</strong>

It is the responsibility of each individual cardholder to:

- Safeguard the credit card and card account number at all times; lost or stolen credit cards must be reported immediately to the issuing bank and the Finance Department;
- Keep credit card in a secure location at all times;
- Not allow anyone else to use the credit card and/or credit card account number.

<strong>F. RESPONSIBILITY FOR TRANSACTIONS AND MONTHLY REPORTING PROCEDURE</strong>

Credit card transactions can be made in store, by telephone, fax, internet or U.S. Mail. It is the responsibility of each individual cardholder to:

1. Obtain and retain original itemized receipts for all goods and services purchased. A copy of the credit card slip indicating the amount of the charge only does not substitute for the itemized receipt. An employee may be allowed to submit an affidavit statement in lieu of a receipt if the original receipt is lost or a receipt is not obtained.
2. Ensure receipt of goods and materials and follow-up with the vendor to resolve any delivery problems, discrepancies or damaged goods.
3. Tell the merchant that payment will be made with the Library’s credit card and that it is a non-taxable purchase. If it is a phone or mail order, give the merchant the card number and expiration date. If you are making the purchase in person, present the card to the merchant.
4. Review in a timely manner monthly statements received from the financial institution provider for accuracy and ensure all transactions posted are legitimate transactions made by the cardholder. This will include reconciling original receipts to the statement transactions.
5. Complete the Credit Card Log located on the staff webpage and attach all original receipts and/or packing slips. The Credit Card Log must be signed.
6. After appropriate supervisor approval, submit the statement, credit card log and documentation in a timely manner to the Finance Department for review of policy and procedure compliance and payment processing. The due date for the credit card payment is on the credit card bill. Cardholders should submit the payment at least 10 days prior to the due date of the payment. Late submission will result in the holder’s card being cancelled or lowering the authorized limits.
7. Follow Library Procedures for Library Director and supervisor approval when required in advance of using the card.

<strong>G. TAX EXEMPTION</strong>

The Library is tax exempt from paying Missouri sales tax. The cardholder is responsible for insuring that sales tax is not charged at the time of purchase. The Library’s tax exempt letter (found on the staff website) should be presented to the vendor if documentation is requested for tax and audit purposes.

<strong>H. SPLITTING OR STRINGING OF PURCHASES</strong>
The splitting or stringing of purchases with the Library credit card is prohibited. Splitting or stringing is the practice of committing multiple credit card transactions to circumvent delegated authority levels, bypass Library competitive bidding requirements, or avoid maximum transaction levels.

---

Administrative Procedure 535.01 (Adopted 5-08)
