# 405 General Policy Statement - Operation and Maintenance

The Board of Trustees expects utilization, operation and maintenance of library plant and equipment to set high standards of safety, to promote the health of customers and staff, to reflect the moral and cultural aspirations of the community and to support environmentally the efforts of the staff to provide excellent library services.

---

Board Policy 405 (Adopted 4-90)

---

## 405.01. General Policy

The Kansas City Public Library places the highest priority on the safety and well-being of its staff, who are its most important asset. With that in mind, it is the responsibility of each staff member, and most particularly the responsibility of each member in a leadership position, to help maintain the highest safety standards, and the constant encouragement of safe work practices. As a public facility, it is the responsibility of each of us to maintain an equally safe and hazard-free environment at all our locations for the customers who are our reason for being.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.01 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.02. Compliance

Safety rules and procedures exist to protect our staff and our customers from needless risks and harm. Deliberate violations of safety rules, or repeated accidents indicating that a member is not doing all that could reasonably be done to prevent an accident, may result in disciplinary action.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.02 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.03. Public Areas

All public areas must be maintained in a clean and orderly manner, free of hazards. It is the responsibility of all staff members to be alert for potential safety hazards, and to report them when seen. Furniture, chairs, books and other items must not be placed in such a manner as to obstruct free movement. Spills or trash on floors must be cleaned up immediately. No equipment or materials may overhang public areas without being secured. All lights in public areas must be in working condition, and burned out bulbs must be replaced immediately. When potential hazards are noted, they should be reported to maintenance staff or the building attendants without delay. All staff members should be familiar with the locations of fire hoses, fire extinguishers and fire exits.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.03 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.04. Staff Working Areas

All staff working areas must be maintained in as clean a manner as public areas, and properly lighted whenever occupied. Telephone or computer cords must not be allowed to cross floor areas unless properly anchored and covered. Carpets must be tightly anchored, with no loose ends, threads or wrinkles, and must not be worn to the point of creating tripping hazards.

Office equipment must be firmly placed on stable platforms, not capable of being inadvertently tipped over. Desk, cabinet and file drawers must be kept closed when not attended. File drawers should be opened one at a time to prevent them from tipping over. All electrical equipment should be properly grounded, and all power cords should be in good condition, without breaks in the insulation, or frayed areas. All tools, equipment and machinery must be kept clean, maintained in good working condition, and used only for their correct purpose. All staff members should be familiar with the locations of fire hoses, fire extinguishers and fire exits in and around their working areas.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.04 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.05. Maintenance Areas

All maintenance areas should be kept free of trash, with all containers tightly closed. Storage of flammable substances must be in appropriate fire-rated cabinets. Tools and working equipment must be properly stored in such a manner as not to cause damage or injury. Items stored should be in stable configuration, and should not create tipping hazards. All cabinets above floor level should be equipped with locking devices to prevent their inadvertent opening.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.05 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.06. Ladders

Ladders must be appropriately rated, and, when used, properly stabilized. Step ladders must be equipped with a metal spreader or locking device to securely hold the front and back sides in position. The top two steps must never be used to stand on. Whenever possible, straight ladders should be tied off at the top, to prevent movement. Ladders should be inspected prior to each use, and any defective ladder should be removed from service immediately. Crates, boxes, or other materials should never be used in place of the appropriate ladder or stepstool.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.06 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.07. Electrical Equipment

Before service or maintenance is performed on any machinery, equipment or electrical circuits capable of the unexpected release of energy, turn them off, disconnect them from the energy source, and either lock or tag out the equipment until such maintenance is completed. (This standard does not apply when servicing cord or plug connected electrical equipment which will be under the exclusive control of the staff member, so long as the power source is visible to that person.)

---

Administrative Procedure 405.07 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.08. Hazardous Materials

The library does not normally maintain a large stock of hazardous materials, but for those items for which a Material Safety Data Sheet has been supplied, the MSDS must be maintained convenient to the place of usage, and available to the staff member for review. Use of hazardous materials requires wearing of appropriate personal protective equipment. A book of MSDS's is maintained by the Security and Safety Manager.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.08 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.09. Bloodborne Pathogens

As a public facility, the library is open to all persons, some of whom may have been exposed to infectious diseases. The most dangerous bloodborne hazards are Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Hepatitis B. These can only be transmitted through bodily fluids, and normal contact is not considered a hazard. HIV virus is extremely delicate, and cannot survive outside the body for appreciable periods of time, or at room temperatures. Hepatitis B is hardy, and can survive for up to 12 days. It can survive in a dried state, reactivating when moistened. Staff who may need to clean up blood or other fluid spills should not do so with bare hands, as entry into the bloodstream may be effected through small cuts, abrasions or rashes of the skin. Any fluids cleaned up should be considered contaminated, and rubber gloves should be worn. Fluids should be cleaned up using a solution of 9 parts water to 1 part Clorox. This solution has a shelf life of only 8 hours, so must be made fresh for each need. Because of the risk of needle sticks, staff should never handle restroom wastes barehanded, nor attempt to use hands to compress the contents of waste bags.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.09 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.10. Lifting and Working Methods

Although the library makes every effort not to create fully loaded boxes, staff members should at all times be aware of proper lifting methods. All loads should be picked up using legs rather than the back, and should be carried only in the erect position. So-called "back belts," while not classified as personal protective equipment, may provide some aid in avoiding back problems, but they must be worn properly. They should be worn low over the hips, and sufficiently snug to prevent uncomfortable bending. They are no substitute for proper conditioning, or correct lifting posture. Back belts are provided by the library upon supervisory request. Staff should avoid long periods of repetitive small motions of the hands, without varying activities. Keyboarded equipment, when staff are using them for long periods, should be equipped with wrist rests or other devices to prevent irritation of wrist and hand tissues. Chairs intended for all-day use of staff should be properly sized and adjusted to prevent fatigue and strain.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.10 (Adopted 9-97)

---

## 405.11. Vehicle Operations

The operation of library vehicles, as well as personal vehicles for library purposes, must be governed by the highest rules of care and caution. No one may drive a library vehicle unless properly authorized, and in possession of a valid driver's license. Supervisors are responsible for assuring that all staff members assigned to drive have valid licenses, and shall periodically check for currency. All vehicles should be inspected prior to use, and safety-related defects should be attended to immediately. Seat belts must be worn by all occupants when driving or riding in a vehicle so equipped. Proper observance of traffic rules is not only a legal issue, but a safety issue as well. Courtesy in driving costs nothing, very rarely results in any appreciable delays, and helps to avoid accidents. If any accident occurs involving a library vehicle, police must be notified, and it must be reported immediately through Library channels, as well.

---

Administrative Procedure 405.11 (Adopted 9-97)

---
[<< 402 Community Use of Library Facilities](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/402.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [410 Determining Extent of New Construction >>](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/410.md)
--- | --- | ---
