# 415 Real Estate and Other Property-Acquisition of Land and/or Buildings

Acquisition of property for Library purposes shall proceed in the following manner:

1. The Board of Trustees shall receive a study by the Library Director showing:
   - The need to purchase property-real estate and/or a building(s), and
   - A suitable financial plan to make the purchase.
2. The Board of Trustees shall approve an authorization for the Library Director to proceed in respect to specified property.
3. The property shall be appraised at current market value by two appraisers who shall be members of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, the Society of Real Estate Appraisers, or a certifying body which subscribes to a similar code of ethics.
4. The Library Director shall recommend to the Board of Trustees an appraiser for each tract or for adjoining tracts proposed for purchase.
5. Negotiations with the owner on the basis of the appraisals shall be made, using professional assistance as approved by the Board of Trustees.
6. The purchase shall be consummated or condemnation proceedings shall be instituted by a favorable vote of at least a majority of the whole Board.
7. All legal considerations shall be adequately covered at each point in the transaction.
8. The Board's general policy regarding affirmative action shall apply wherever practical.

---

Board Policy 415 (Adopted 4-90)

---
[<< 414 Real Estate and Other Property-Acquisition](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/414.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [416 Condemnation of Land >>](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/416.md)
--- | --- | ---
