# 418 Naming Library Facilities

The Board of Trustees shall have sole responsibility for naming or renaming Library facilities and/or subunits of facilities. Generally, facilities shall be named with a preference for geographic or functional designations. Exceptions may be considered when there is a strong community desire for a specific name for a facility, when the Board desires to honor an individual for outstanding contributions in keeping with the nature and mission of the Library, or when a donor or donors desire a specific designation for a facility and contributes significantly to the construction cost of the facility or makes an equivalent contribution to the Library endowment. The Chief Executive shall be responsible for developing guidelines and administrative procedures to effectively consider such exceptions.

All naming requests will be brought before the Board for their approval with exceptions to policy explicitly noted.

The Chief Executive will provide background material on the designee, proposed wording for recognition, reasons for the recognition, and justification of costs and donations at a Board meeting for approval at a future Board of Trustees meeting.

---

Board Policy 418 (Adopted 2-91/Rev. 7-07)

---

## i. Naming Library Facilities in Recognition of Donors

New or geographically named Library facilities may be named or renamed as designated by a donor who makes a significant monetary contribution to the Library. Donors who wish to name such facilities and have the unit bear their desired name exclusively, must provide 75% to 100% of the cost of construction and equipment.

Donors who will allow subunits of the facility or site to include other naming opportunities must provide 50% of the cost of construction. In either instance, the "cost of construction" will be the actual cost expended, if the amount of the contribution is negotiated within three (3) years of actual construction, or the current replacement/construction cost if the facility is more than three years old.

Other naming opportunities within a facility will include such areas as auditoriums, meeting rooms, special use areas, collections and equipment. Appropriate contributions for such naming opportunities will be determined by square footage cost, actual cost of equipment, on-going operating cost, etc., depending on the specific area or item. Such naming opportunities should be available to donors for 50% to l00% of the actual cost.

Named facilities or areas within facilities shall bear a plaque citing the significant role of the donor in expanding the scope of Library services. Plaques or other commemorative items will be provided by the Library.

In consultation with the Board of Trustees, the Library Director will establish and periodically update a listing of minimum contributions required to name Library facilities or subunits. Final decisions on naming facilities and/or accepting any offers of contributions to name facilities shall rest with the Board of Trustees.

---

Administrative Procedure 418.01 (Adopted 2-91)

---

## ii. Tribute, Memorial or Community Initiated Naming of Library Facilities

When there is significant community interest in naming a new library facility or portion of a library facility or in renaming a geographically designated library facility, the Library Director will recommend to the Board of Trustees the formation of a committee composed of citizens, staff and representatives of local community groups. The committee will be charged with the task of determining the desirability of any suggested names, making alternative suggestions for name possibilities and/or recommending that no name change be made or that a geographic designation be used.

In considering potential names for facilities to honor or memorialize individuals, persons appropriate for consideration would include those who have attained local or national prominence in the field of education, science, art, statesmanship, political service, industry, etc.; and whose contributions are consistent with the nature and mission of the Library.

The committee will make its recommendations to the Library Director, who will then report to the Library Board. The Board of Trustees will have the final responsibility for naming any Library facility.

---

Administrative Procedure 418.02 (Adopted 2-91)
