# 420 Real Estate-Sale of Properties

The Board of Trustees shall consider disposal of any real estate owned by the Library District but no longer needed for library purposes. Disposal of such property shall be in the manner prescribed by state law and in keeping with other appropriate real estate procedures.

The Board of Trustees by an affirmative vote of at least a majority of the whole Board, may direct and authorize the sale and transfer of any real estate belonging to the Library District Sale or disposal of property other than real estate is set forth in Board Policy 550.

Real Estate when sold shall be:

1. To the highest bidder after public notice; or
2. To a state agency, municipal corporation, or other governmental subdivision, after notice, by negotiation; or
3. To a public institution of higher learning by negotiation.

Whenever the Board of Trustees approves the sale of real estate owned by the Library, it shall be the policy of the Board:

1. To seek the maximum legal financial return from the sale; however, this general objective shall not preclude transactions made on a negotiated basis when permitted by law.
2. To utilize the assistance of people who have expertise in the sale of such property including appraisals and marketing.
3. In the event that the District shall require special commitments or documentation from bidders the Board of Trustees may review such commitments or documents or refer them to a committee of its members for review and recommendation to the Board of Trustees.
4. To reserve the right to reject all bids whenever the Board of Trustees decides the price offered to be too low.

---

Board Policy 410 (Adopted 4-90)

---
[<< 419 Renaming Library Facilities](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/419.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [421 Posting of Proposed Sale of Real Estate >>](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/421.md)
--- | --- | ---
