# 424 Public Art

The Library's mission to help educate, enrich, entertain and inform can be visually demonstrated through the incorporation of public art in library facilities. The Library Board sees public art as a tangible expression of community, an inspiration to citizens and a statement of civic pride. As a standard practice, the Library Board will seek to incorporate fine art (that is, visual art such as paintings, sculpture, photographs, graphics, etc. created primarily for aesthetic purposes and judged for its beauty and meaningfulness) and artistic architectural elements in Library buildings when constructing facilities.

Fine art that no longer has a relevant place in the Library art collection and which has been owned for at least two years may be deaccessioned and disposed of as follows:

A majority vote of the Library Board is required to authorize the deaccession and disposal of art (or multiple art pieces) with an appraised or estimated value of more than \$10,000;

The Executive Director may authorize the deaccession and disposal of art with an appraised or estimated value of \$10,000 or less;

Should the deaccessed art be sold, the funds received will be allocated to the Library Art Fund, unless directed to alternative allocations by a majority vote of the Library Board.

No member of the Library Board, staff, or anyone whose association with the Library might give them an advantage in acquiring the art work shall be permitted to acquire directly or indirectly a work deaccessioned by the Library, or otherwise benefit from its sale or trade.

The Executive Director shall establish and maintain procedures to implement and enforce all art deaccession and disposal policies.

---

Board Policy 424 (Adopted 9-01, Revised 3-16)

## 424.01 Procedures for Deaccession and Disposal of Public Art

The process of deaccessioning and disposal for fine art will be initiated by the appropriate staff and any recommendations, with full justification, presented to the Executive Director for review. As part of this process, staff will conduct a review of all records to determine donor intent, clear title, donor restrictions , and current market value of the art. In determining the current market value, third-party appraisal will be used for works with an estimated substantial value. If the Executive Director determines that deaccessioning is appropriate, the proposal shall be presented to the Library Board or its designee for authorization.

When feasible, the Library will notify the donor of a work under consideration for deaccession and disposal, and circumstances may warrant extending similar courtesy to the heirs of a donor.

All fine art will be deaccessed and disposed of in accordance with any special prior agreements between the Library and a donor. If no such agreements exist, the art will be disposed of in accordance with the Library’s disposal policies for obsolete books, materials, and supplies (Library Policy 534). Preferred methods of disposal are sale or transfer to, or exchange with another public institution, sale through publicly advertised auction, and sale or exchange through a reputable, established dealer.

In the case of a work of fine art by a living artist, consideration may be given to notifying the artist of the deaccession, and consideration may be given to an exchange with the artist.

---

Administrative Procedure 424.01 (Adopted 3-16)

---
[<< 423 Leasing of Library Property](/policies/400-facilities-equipment/423.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [500 Administration and Support >>](/policies/500-administration-support/)
--- | --- | ---
