# 108 Acceptable Use of Electronic Information Systems

The Library shall provide access to electronic information systems (including computers, computer networks and electronic information resources) to staff members and customers as is sufficient for the fulfillment of its mission. In compliance with the Children's Internet Protection Act, Kansas City Urban Public Library restricts minors from gaining computer access to material that is pornographic in accordance with sections 182.825 and 182.827, RSMo.

All computers shall be equipped with software to limit a minor's ability to gain access to material that is pornographic or to purchase Internet connectivity from an Internet service provider that provides filter services to limit access to material that is pornographic. Use of these systems shall be consistent with the Library's mission, goals, policies and procedures, and with applicable local, state, federal and international laws. The Library also expects that users of these systems shall not interfere with systems operations, integrity or security, or otherwise inhibit normal Library activities. The Library is responsible for systems operations and integrity, and may develop appropriate procedures to ensure systems efficiency, reliability, and security, and legal and ethical system use.

Board Policy 108 (Adopted 12-1995/Amended 1-2004)

## 108.01. Statement of Responsibility

The Information Technology Services department (ITS) is responsible for all aspects of electronic information systems development, management, and maintenance. As part of this responsibility, ITS is empowered by the Library Director to authorize access to system elements (including computers and peripheral devices, network components, programs, program elements, files or data), to implement reasonable and appropriate measures to ensure systems reliability, integrity and security, and to enforce related policies and procedures. Attempts to violate or circumvent these policies and procedures will result in disciplinary action, which may include temporary or permanent loss of system access or privileged system use, or civil or criminal legal action.

Administrative Procedure 108.01 (Adopted 11-95)

## 108.02. Statement of Confidentiality

Transaction logs, electronic mail and other information which could be used to identify users with specific materials or subject matter are considered by the Library to be confidential, and will not be divulged to anyone other than the user. All users are advised that such records shall not be made available to any agency of state, federal or local government except pursuant to such process, order or subpoena as may be authorized under the authority of, and pursuant to, federal, state or local law relating to criminal, civil, or administrative discovery procedures or legislative investigatory power. The Library resists the issuance or enforcement of any such process, order or subpoena until such time as a proper showing of good cause has been made in a court of competent jurisdiction.

Administrative Procedure 108.02 (Adopted 11-95)

## 108.03. Systems Security

1. Users may not attempt to add, modify, or remove any system element without the explicit authority to do so, or the express permission of ITS.
2. Users may not attempt or assist unauthorized access to privileged or confidential system elements.
3. User passwords, or any other information related to systems security may not be divulged, shared, or otherwise compromised.
4. Additions or modifications to user access or privilege may not be made without ITS authorization (and, for Library staff, supervisory consent).
5. Use of Library systems to evade security measures on any system is prohibited.

Administrative Procedure 108.03 (Adopted 11-95)

## 108.04. Systems Reliability

1. Users may not impede systems use through the monopolization or unreasonable consumption of system resources, or by any attempt to delay or halt system operations.
2. System maintenance, including software installations or upgrades, must be performed by ITS or their explicitly authorized agent. No unauthorized software may be downloaded, installed or executed on Library systems.
3. Staff members may not acquire system access, or authorization for the use of any privileged system element, without appropriate training from ITS or their explicitly authorized agent.

Administrative Procedure 108.04 (Adopted 11-95)

## 108.05. Legal and Ethical Use

1. Users may not attempt to access security-related or otherwise confidential information without the explicit authority to do so.
2. Users may not employ Library systems to falsely identify themselves, falsely represent themselves, the Library or any of its policies, services or practices, or otherwise commit forgery or fraud.
3. Users may not employ Library systems for the purpose of libel, slander, or any form of harassment.
4. Staff members may not systematically employ system resources for the purpose of personal commercial gain.
5. Electronic communications and publications originating from Library systems are considered to be representative of the Library. Staff are to adhere to Library guidelines for public communications, as determined by the Marketing Department and other appropriate Library personnel.

Administrative Procedure 108.05 (Adopted 11-95)

## 108.06. Electronic Materials

1. U.S. copyright law (Title 17, U.S. Code) prohibits the unauthorized reproduction or distribution of copyrighted materials, except as permitted by the principles of "fair use." Users may not copy or distribute electronic materials (including electronic mail, text, images, programs or data) without the explicit permission of the copyright holder. Any responsibility for any consequences of copyright infringement lies with the user; the Library expressly disclaims any liability or responsibility resulting from such use.
2. Electronic materials (including electronic mail) produced by Library employees on Library systems are considered to be works-for-hire and are the Library's intellectual property. However, the Library may not be held responsible or liable for the use of its systems for unsanctioned communications or publications, or any consequences thereof.
3. The Library expressly disclaims any liability or responsibility arising from access to or use of information obtained through its electronic information systems, or any consequences thereof.

Administrative Procedure 108.06 (Adopted 11-95)

## 108.07. Internet Access by Minors

The Library presents many educational and recreational opportunities for minors including access to the Internet. Just as Library staff select materials for children and young adults, they also select Web sites designed for these age groups. These Web sites are highlighted in YouthZone, both KidLinks and TeenScene.

The Internet provides access to a wide variety of viewpoints on topics of interest. As with other materials, parents may find that some Internet sites may not be appropriate for their children. The Library hopes that parents will take an active role in their children's learning and recreation by helping them select materials and Web sites that are appropriate to their age and interests.

Since all access to the Internet is through a library card, the following guidelines are used when minors apply for a library card.

<strong>Children 12 and Under</strong>: Parents/guardians of children 12 years or under, when applying for a library card for their children, are required to select one of two types of cards for each child: Restricted Access or Guided Access.

<strong>Restricted Access</strong> makes accessible only children's software applications such as Creative Writer and software such as Microsoft Office; there is no Internet access. The online catalog, which requires the use of a Web browser, is not accessible, nor are online databases and Web-based services.

<strong>Guided Access</strong> gives children access to the Library's Youth Zone, including KidLinks, which highlights Web sites designed for children and selected by Library staff, as well as access to all the Library's electronic resources including the Internet. Library card applications must be signed by a parent/guardian.

<strong>Young Adults 13 and Over</strong>: Young adults must present reasonable identification in order to apply for a library card; they are required to sign the application themselves. Through their library card, young adults age 13 and over have access to the full resources of the Library, including the Internet. They are expected to abide by all Acceptable Use policies.

Administrative Procedure 108.07 (Adopted 1-03)
