# 208 Collection Maintenance

The Library Director shall establish procedures for maintaining the collection and retaining it in attractive and usable condition.

Board Policy 208 (Adopted 8-89)

## 208.01. Replacement

It is the library's policy not to automatically replace all books withdrawn because of loss, damage, or wear. Need for replacement in each case is judged by two factors: (1) the existence of adequate coverage in the field by similar material, especially if there is later and better material; and (2) demand for the specific title.

Administrative Procedure 208.01 (Adopted 6-84)

## 208.02. Binding and Mending

Keeping materials in good physical condition is essential. Decisions must be made continuously on how to handle worn books—whether to mend, bind or withdraw them. Each decision is based on the condition of the book, current validity of its contents, availability for reorder and cost of binding vs. replacement. Replacement is preferable to binding if costs are comparable. Binding is preferable to mending if a title is expected to have long-term usefulness. Mending is done only when need is detected early and the result is an attractive appearance.

Administrative Procedure 208.02 (Adopted 6-84)

## 208.03. Weeding

Weeding is selection in reverse—it is the withdrawal of items no longer suitable for or useful in the collection. Weeding is a thorough and conscientious effort to achieve a well-balanced collection and it should be a continuous, consistent process. Factors to be considered in weeding are:

1. Physical condition of the material.
2. Slow-moving material not listed in standard sources; e.g. Fiction Catalog.
3. Items containing subject matter no longer of current interest.
4. Multiple copies of titles no longer in demand.
5. Old editions replaced by later revisions of non-fiction titles.
6. Retention of local materials and materials by Kansas City and Missouri authors.

Administrative Procedure 208.03 (Adopted 6-84)
