# 209 Request for Reconsideration of Library Materials

The Library Director shall establish procedures for evaluating and responding to any citizen's request to expunge or add specific materials to the library collection.

Board Policy 209 (Adopted 3-98)

## 209.01. Citizen's Request for Reconsideration of Library Materials

The suitability of particular books or other materials for the library collection may occasionally be questioned by individuals or groups. All such criticism should be presented in writing to the Library Director on the ''Citizen's Request for Reconsideration of Library Material.'' (See Appendices section, Appen. 209.01)

The completed form and a copy of the material in question will be considered for review and evaluation The review of questioned materials will be treated objectively and as an important matter. General acceptance of the material will be checked by consulting authoritative lists and critical reviews in light of the library selection policy. Passages will not be taken out of context and the material will be evaluated in its entirety.

A committee consisting of three to five appropriate staff members will report its evaluation and any recommended action to the Library Director. Within 30 days after receipt of the reconsideration request, the Library Director will inform the complainant of the results of the committee's evaluation and any action which will be taken by the library. In the event of an appeal of the decision of the Library Director by the complainant, the Library Board will serve as the final arbiter.

Administrative Procedure 209.01 (Adopted 6-84)
