# 014. Public Hearings and Communications

Any person or delegation desiring to make a presentation to the Board may be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting by making a request to the Board (through the Board President or Library Director) not less than four days before the meeting date and stating his/her name and address. Bring a summary (verbal or written) of the presentation. A presentation not on the agenda may be heard only with the unanimous consent of all Board members present.

Requests to make presentations to the Board will be accepted and listed in the order they are filed with the Library Director in preparing the agenda, except that priority will be given to presentations on:

1. Items on which the Board specifically has invited input.
2. Items earned over by vote of the Board from a previous meeting.
3. Business on the current agenda.

When the time allotted for hearings for a given meeting is filled or consumed, additional items will be listed for hearing at the next regular meeting.

A person listed on the agenda will be recognized by the President of the Board at the proper time during the meeting. Presentations are generally limited to three minutes, except that the Board may occasionally vote to extend the time at the current meeting; or at its option, the Board may vote to continue the subject at the next regular or special meeting. If there are numerous requests to address the Board on the same subject, the President may select representatives to speak on each side of the issue and place a limit on the total time for the presentation. Items not heard at one meeting shall be rescheduled for the next. The Board may overrule a decision of the President on the above matters by a majority vote of those present.

In the interest of orderly conduct of Board meetings, spontaneous discussion is discouraged. However, the Board by unanimous vote or assent may agree to hear any delegation or individual at any time, notwithstanding the above stated requirement for an advance request.

The Board may ask questions during or after a presentation but generally will not attempt to give definitive answers to matters presented in a public hearing. Instead, such matters generally will be referred to the Library Director for study and recommendation. It is in the interest of the Board that the individual or group making a presentation to the Board shall have a prompt reply from the Library Director.

This policy is adopted in order that the Board may carry out the necessary business of the Library District and yet encourage public participation. The intent is:

1. To provide a means whereby everyone who wishes to address the Board may have a fair and adequate hearing.
2. To allow the Library Director an opportunity to take action, or to recommend action to the Board, when policies have already been established by the Board.
3. To minimize the possibility of the Board's taking ill-advised, illegal or improper actions in the absence of adequate information and study, especially when a policy does not exist, a change in policy is proposed, or an exception to policy is requested.
4. To control the amount of time devoted to public hearings in order that the Board may be given adequate consideration to the proposals as well as to other business on the agenda.

---

Board Policy 014 (Adopted 6-89)
