# 034. Policy on Suspected Fraud, Dishonesty and Whistle-Blower Protection

Any person who knows of or has a suspicion about possible fraudulent or dishonest use or misuse of Library property by any director, trustee, officer or employee of the Library, should contact the Human Resources Director. If the alleged wrongdoing concerns the Human Resources Director, then the Chief Executive/Director of the Library or the President or other officer of the Library should be notified instead.

If the Human Resources Director, Chief Executive/Director, President or other officer of the Library receives information about fraud or dishonesty, they shall promptly inform the Chair of the Board of Trustees Finance and Audit Committee. The Chair shall determine if allegations should be referred to the Chief Executive/Director or taken to the Board of Trustees Finance and Audit Committee to determine the procedure for investigating credible allegations. If referred to the Chief Executive/Director the results of the investigation must be reported to the Finance and Audit Committee at the next scheduled meeting. The Finance and Audit Committee shall retain as a part of the records of the Committee information regarding any such complaints or concerns for a period of at least seven years.

Reports of concerns or complaints, and the investigation pertaining thereto, shall be kept confidential to the extent possible, consistent with the need to conduct an adequate investigation. Disclosure of reports of concerns or complaints to individuals not involved in the investigation will be viewed as a serious disciplinary offense and may result in disciplinary action.

There will be no punishment or other retaliation for the reporting of conduct under this policy. Any Director, Trustee, officer, agent, or employee of the Library who knowingly takes any retaliatory actions against a reporting individual for reporting suspected fraud or dishonesty is subject to disciplinary action at the discretion of the Board of Trustees and may be in violation of law.

If the person reporting the information under this policy requests anonymity, this request will be respected to the extent that doing so does not impede any investigation.

---

Board Policy 034 (Adopted 11-11, Revised 5-13)
