# 526. Inventories

The Library Board of Trustees shall exercise the sole and exclusive control over all of the property and things of value owned or possessed by the District. The Library Director shall devise and maintain a system of inventories which will identify, locate, control, and properly account for all property, equipment and goods of the Library, including but not limited to a clear record of all additions to and deletions from Library holdings. The inventory system shall state clearly the responsibility delegated to departments and individual staff members for inventory and inventory control purposes. It shall also provide accurate records of Library books, movable equipment such as tools, machinery, audiovisual equipment, typewriters and the like, including losses of equipment and supplies not consumed in the process of use. (Ref: 182.705(10) RSMo)

The Library Director shall inform the Board in the event of loss or theft of any material amount.

---

Board Policy 526 (Adopted 2-90)

---

## 526.01. Notification of Loss or Theft of Any Material Amount

Any property, equipment, or materials which are lost, stolen or damaged should be reported to the appropriate Associate Director or Director by the Department Manager. For any such item which is listed on the fixed asset inventory, an "Asset Transfer/Retirement" form should be completed. The Library Director shall inform the Board in the event of loss or theft of any property, equipment, or materials with a value of \$5,000 or more.

---

Administrative Procedure 526.01 (Adopted 6-90)

---
[<< 523 Borrowing](/policies/500-administration-support/523.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [527 State and Federal Grants or Aid >>](/policies/500-administration-support/527.md)
--- | --- | ---
