# 532. Authority to Contract

<strong>Delegation of Authority to Contract</strong>

The Board of Trustees delegates to the Library Director the authority to contract on behalf of the Library for the purchase of goods or services when the annual aggregate amount of the contract is $50,000 or lesser value and said purchases are pursuant to a budget previously approved by the Board. Contracts committing the Library to amounts in excess of $50,000 annually shall be approved by specific action of the Board in formal session.

No contract or order imposing any financial obligation on the Library shall be binding upon the Library unless it is in writing, signed by the President and the Secretary of the Board of Trustees, or by the Library Director, or Director’s specifically authorized designee, or other agent of the Library specifically authorized to sign on behalf of the District.

<strong>Contracting for Architectural, Engineering or Land Surveying Services</strong>

The Library Director shall establish procedures to negotiate contracts for architectural, engineering and land surveying services on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications for the type of services required and at fair and reasonable prices. (Ref. 8.285, 8.291 RSMo)

<strong>Contracting for Guaranteed Energy Cost Savings</strong>

The Library Director shall establish procedures for awarding contracts for guaranteed energy cost savings. (Ref. 8.231 RSMo)

<strong>Employment of Unauthorized Aliens Prohibited</strong>

For any contract over \$5,000 for work done in the state of Missouri, no contractor with the Library shall knowingly employ, hire for employment, or continue to employ an unauthorized alien to perform work within the state of Missouri. For such contracts, contractors will be required to execute a notarized affidavit to affirm that these conditions are met. (Ref. 285.530 RSMo, 285.525—285.550 RSMo)

---

Board Policy 532 (Adopted 2-90/Rev. 12-98, Rev. 6-11, Rev. 11-17)

---
[<< 531 Procurement](/policies/500-administration-support/531.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [533 Construction of Facilities >>](/policies/500-administration-support/533.md)
--- | --- | ---
