# 537. Cellular Telephone Policy

To provide more efficient communications in the course of daily business, the Library Director may authorize the assignment and use of Library provided cellular telephones, or the payment of a cellular phone allowance to cover business related expenses.

Cellular telephone (“cell phone”) for the purposes of this policy is any device that is being used, in any measure, to make or receive wireless calls on the public cellular telephone networks. The device may also be a personal digital assistant (PDA) and include data services.

The Library Director shall establish and maintain procedures and forms for implementing and monitoring assignment and use of Library issued cell phones and the requirements and calculation of the cell phone allowance. Such procedures will comply with Internal Revenue Service requirements for appropriately monitoring usage, documenting business purpose and seeking reimbursements for any personal calls to maintain the business usage status of the equipment and service.

Library issued cell phones may be provided to employees to improve customer service, enhance business efficiency, and provide safety and/or security while on Library business travel. The phones are not a personal benefit and shall not be a primary mode of communication, unless they are the most cost-effective means to conduct Library business.

Library issued cell phones are to be used for Library business purposes only, and only in emergencies or other limited circumstances as defined in procedures by the Library Director, can the Library issued cell phone be used for personal communications. In such cases, the employee must reimburse the Library for the cost of any personal calls. Failure to pay for personal calls shall result in revocation of an employee’s cell phone privileges. Any unpaid personal calls may be deducted from an employee’s paycheck.

Employees are responsible for operating Library-owned vehicles and potentially hazardous equipment in a safe and prudent manner, and therefore, employees should refrain from using cellular phones while operating such vehicles. The same required safety considerations should be considered while operating a personal vehicle and using the cell phone.

Employees violating any provision of this policy may be subject to disciplinary action.

---

Board Policy 537 (Adopted 12-2008)

---

## 537.01. Procedures for Library Provided Cell Phones and Cell Phone Allowances

<strong>OBTAINING CELL PHONES</strong>

Employees approved for a Library cell phone by the Library Director or designee will be required to sign a receipt acknowledgment form indicating receipt of the cell phone and acceptance of the policy and procedures for cell phone use. The Information Technology Department is responsible for acquisition and service contracts for Library cell phones.

<strong>AUTHORIZED CELL PHONE USE</strong>

Library issued cell phones are to be used for Library business purposes only, except for personal use in a de minimis manner (defined as no more than an average of 30 minutes per month) for emergencies or limited calls of convenience, unless the employee elects to reimburse the Library as prescribed below. Additionally, employees are responsible for reimbursing the Library for any personal roaming charges or service features where monthly plan limits are exceeded.

The Library recognizes the inconvenience of maintaining and carrying a personal and a Library issued cell phone, and therefore the Library Director or designee may approve utilizing a Library cell phone for regular personal use that exceeds de minimis use, consistent with Library policy and procedures. Such regular personal use should not be the predominant use of the cell phone, as Library cell phones are intended for only those employees that require a cell phone for Library-related business.

<strong>Library cell phone use must comply with the Library’s cell phone use procedures. Violations of the Library Cell Phone Policies and Procedures may result in revocation of use privileges and disciplinary action, including restitution to the Library for unauthorized use.</strong>

<strong>CELL PHONE SECURITY</strong>

The employee is responsible for the safekeeping of the Library issued cell phone at all times. The employee is responsible for the loss of the Library cell phone and must pay for replacement of the cell phone unless sufficient proof can be supplied that the phone was stolen or lost outside the control of the employee.

<strong>RESPONSIBILITY FOR MONTHLY REVIEW AND REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURE</strong>
It is the responsibility of the employee issued a Library cell phone to:

1. Review in a timely manner monthly cell phone bills which will be received from the Purchasing Department. Any incorrectly billed or suspicious phone call should be reported to the Purchasing Department in a timely manner. Any personal roaming or service feature charges must be reported to the Purchasing Department and reimbursed to the Library.
2. With the approval of the Library Director or designee, employees may elect to reimburse the Library at a rate of \$10 a month utilizing a monthly payroll deduction for regular personal use of the Library cell phone. Employees must submit a completed Cell Phone Payroll Deduction form to the Purchasing Department when selecting or canceling this option. Employees are required to monitor personal cell phone use to assure it is consistent with the Cell Phone Policy.

<strong>ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF CELL PHONE ALLOWANCE</strong>
If a Library employee's job duties include the frequent need for a cell phone for business purposes and the Library Director or designee determines that the volume of use of the cell phone would make the requirement of maintaining detailed records of calls made unreasonable, then the employee is eligible for an allowance to cover cell phone expenses, including data services as required.

Employees approved for a cell phone allowance will be required to sign a receipt acknowledgement form indicating receipt of allowance and acceptance of the policy and procedures for cell phone allowances.

This allowance does not constitute an increase to base pay, and will not be included in the calculation of percentage increases to base pay due to annual raises, job upgrades, etc. Allowances will be paid as part of an eligible employee’s paycheck. The allowance is taxable income; therefore the individual will be taxed in accordance with IRS tax regulations.

The dollar amount of the cell phone allowance should cover the employee's projected business-related expenses. These expenses are the cost of basic equipment (one-time expense), and the cost of the employee's monthly cell phone plan. The plan chosen should be the least expensive that provides adequate business-related services. Upgrades to basic equipment or expected cell phone use unrelated to business cannot be considered in the calculation of the allowance. Determination of the dollar amount of the allowance will be made by the Finance Department, in coordination with the Information Technology Department.

The employee must retain an active cell phone contract as long as a cell phone allowance is in place. Because the cell phone is owned personally by the employee, and the allowance provided is taxable income, the employee may use the phone for both business and personal purposes, as needed. The employee may, at his or her own expense, add extra services or equipment features, as desired.

Use of the phone in any manner contrary to local, state, or federal laws will constitute misuse, and will result in immediate termination of the cell phone allowance.

---

Administrative Procedure 537.01 (Adopted 12-2008/Revised 9-2011/Revised 3-2013)

---
[<< 536 Confidential and Sensitive Personal Information Policy](/policies/500-administration-support/536.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [600 Community Relations >>](/policies/600-community-relations/)
--- | --- | ---
