# 531. Procurement

<strong>Policy Statement</strong>

All purchases for the Library shall be accomplished in accordance with good business practices to assure that goods and services are procured efficiently, effectively, and at the most favorable prices available to the Library; to promote full and open competition in procurement and contracting; to provide safeguards for maintaining a system of quality and integrity; and to assure that Library purchasing actions are in full compliance with state law and federal guidelines.

All purchases for the Library shall be accomplished in a manner as to assure the prudent and economical use of public moneys in the best interest of the taxpayers.

The Library Director shall establish and maintain procedures to implement and enforce all purchasing policies.

<strong>Authority to Purchase</strong>

The Board of Trustees delegates to the Library Director, or Director’s designee, the authority to purchase, without specific Board action, goods or services of $50,000 or lesser value, so long as said purchases are pursuant to a budget previously approved by the Board. The purchase of all other goods or services with a value in excess of $50,000 shall be authorized by specific action of the Board in formal session.

<strong>Bidding Limits</strong>

Purchases of goods or services of less than \$1,000 in a fiscal year shall not require a bid.

Unless exempted by policy, purchases of goods or services with an amount equal to or greater than $1,000 but not more than $10,000 shall require informal bids.

Unless exempted by policy, purchases of goods or services exceeding \$10,000 shall require a formal competitive bid solicitation.

To determine whether an item will need to be bid, the cost of goods and services that are purchased on a repetitive basis will be considered as an aggregate expense for the fiscal year.

<strong>Bidding Exemptions</strong>

Bid procedures need not be utilized for the following:

- Sole source items or services
- Consulting services (services which provide only professional or expert knowledge, advice, or information)
- Legal services
- Insurance services (these services will be solicited by a broker—the broker services will need to be bid)
- Purchases through State contracts or other government bid contracts
- Purchases from non-profit organizations that provide goods or services that support the Library’s mission or activities
- Library materials (books, databases, etc.), so long as one book or material item does not exceed \$10,000
- Emergencies
- Special Circumstances as approved by the Library Director or Board of Trustees—as described below

<strong>Emergency Purchases</strong>

The Library may waive the requirement of competitive bids or proposals for goods and services when it has been determined that there exists a threat to life, property, public health or public safety or when immediate expenditure is necessary for repairs to Library property in order to protect against further loss or damage, or to prevent or minimize serious disruption to Library services. Emergency procurements shall be made with as much competition as is practicable under the circumstances. (Ref. 34.045 RSMo)

In the event of an emergency, the Library Director, or Director’s designee may authorize immediate action to purchase necessary supplies or services without bidding or prior specific approval of the Board. For products or services with a value in excess of \$50,000, the Board of Trustees will be informed in writing of the emergency purchases within forty-eight (48) hours of the emergency and the products or services shall be submitted for formal approval at the next meeting of the Board.

<strong>Special Circumstances</strong>

The Library Director may waive the bid requirements for goods or services when existing contractual services, workflow, supplies, materials or equipment make consideration of another product or service impractical, unfeasible, or cost prohibitive under the current circumstances. Such exemptions and the reasons for the exemption will be documented, and will be reviewed annually. For goods or services over \$50,000, these exemptions must be approved by formal action of the Board of Trustees.

<strong>Purchasing Preferences for Minority, Women and Local Business Enterprises</strong>

It is the policy of the Library to provide equal opportunities in all its activities in a manner that will not discriminate against any contractor or subcontractor because of race, religion, creed, national origin, age, sex or handicap. It is also the policy of the Library to provide maximum opportunity to minority and women business enterprises (M/WBE) to ensure their participation in the performance of Library contracts for the procurement of supplies and materials, construction projects, professional services, and any other services required by the Library.

For purchases of goods and services, a preference will be given to M/WBE and local businesses. The Library Director shall establish goals for M/WBE and local business selection, and report to the Board at least annually on the goals for M/WBE and local business selection.

<strong>M/WBE Program Administration</strong>

The Library Director or Director’s designee shall monitor the M/WBE program and will ensure that the Library's annual goals are consistently achieved. The Library will prepare and incorporate into its bid solicitations conditions for M/WBE participation. Said conditions will be incorporated, as a material provision, into all contracts let pursuant to such solicited bids.

<strong>Preference for Missouri Businesses</strong>

In letting contracts for the performance of any job or service, the Library shall give preference to all firms, corporations, or individuals doing business as Missouri firms, corporations, or which maintain Missouri offices or places of business, when the quality of performance promised is equal or better and the price quoted is the same or less. (Ref. 34.073 RSMo)

To the extent permitted by federal laws and regulations, whenever the Library shall let for bid any contract to a contractor for any public works or product of \$5,000 or more, the contractor or bidder domiciled outside the boundaries of the state of Missouri shall be required, in order to be successful, to submit a bid the same percent less than the lowest bid submitted by a responsible contractor or bidder domiciled in Missouri as would be required for such a Missouri domiciled contractor or bidder to succeed over the bidding contractor or bidder domiciled outside Missouri on a like contract or bid being let in the person's domiciliary state and, further, the contractor or bidder domiciled outside the boundaries of Missouri shall be required to submit an audited financial statement as would be required of a Missouri domiciled contractor or bidder on a like contract or bid being let in the domiciliary state of that contractor or bidder. (Ref. 34.076 RSMo)

<strong>Purchasing Prohibitions</strong>

No purchase of goods or services on behalf of the Library shall be made from (1) any current Board member or a member of a current Board member’s immediate household; or (2) any employee or member of an employee’s immediate household; or (3) any business in which a current Board member’s or an employee’s immediate household holds a substantial interest.

---

Board Policy 531 (Adopted 2-90/Rev. 4-03, Rev. 6-11, Rev. 11-17)
