# 001. General Policy Statement and Definition

The policymaking, or legislative function, of the Library District is specifically rested in the Board of Trustees of the Library District by the laws of the State of Missouri. The Board believes that a statement of policy positions about its own operations as included in this series is needed for the following reasons:

1. To acquaint the residents of the Library District and the District's employees with the role and purposes of the Board as defined by law and the Board's own intent.
2. To point out the authorizations which the Board may use and the restraints which it must accept in carrying out its legal mandate to the residents of the Library District.
3. To encourage thoughtful and considerate support from residents and employees in meeting the challenges related to the operation of a public library system.

As used in the foregoing by-laws and the following policy and procedure statements, terms shall be defined as follows:

1. A law is drawn directly from State statute or Federal legislation and places a mandatory obligation, prohibition or direction on the Library Board of Trustees. Thus a law is not subject to change by the Board and can be altered or amended only by the enacting legislative body.
2. A by-law is a rule adopted by the Library Board to govern the way in which the Board is structured and conducts the business of the Library District. A by-law is subordinate to the Missouri Constitution and State statutes affecting the Library District.
3. A policy is a declaration by the Board in respect to a purpose, goal, objective, or other intent or expectation as to how the Board will conduct its business and what results will be achieved through the operation of the Library.
4. A procedure is a declaration adopted by the Library Administration to implement and comply with State or Federal legislation, Board by-law or policy, or to facilitate operation of the Library.

---

Board Policy 001 (Adopted 6-89)
---
[Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [002 Policy Proposals and Action >>](/policies/000-internal-policies/002.md)
--- | ---
