# 032. Board Travel Expenses - Payment

Library Board policy for Board member reimbursement for travel is as follows:

1. Allowance Requirements. All allowances shall be for the amount of expenses subject to:
   - Prescribed prior authorization or within established maximums.
   - Correct reporting.
   - Properly presented and substantiated request for funds, advance payment or reimbursement.
   - Approval as outlined in procedures established for payments generally.
2. Reporting and Claiming Reimbursement. Advance registration and transportation for Board approved travel by members will be paid directly by the Library. Reimbursement for accommodations, meals and other out-of-pocket expenses within the authorized travel allowance determined by the Board shall be based upon documented expenses as recorded and reported on the expense reimbursement claim form. Receipts should be provided for all expenses whenever practical to do so and must be provided for any specific expense in excess of \$25.00 paid as an out-of-pocket expense. Travel records for all Board members and Library staff shall become part of the Library's permanent file and shall be available to public scrutiny under the Open Records Law.
3. Advances of Expense Money. Generally, the Library does not advance expense money except through the prepayment of registration or transportation expense. In the event that non-payment of an advance expense allowance would cause undue hardship, such allowance will be provided upon request by Board members at least seven (7) days prior to expected use. The balance of any advance allowance in excess of expenses shall be returned to the District within 30 days along with an accounting of the funds expended using currently adopted reporting forms.
4. Individual and Group Report. Generally, each member will be expected to itemize and report his/her own expenses; however, whenever one member pays expenses for another member(s), the name(s) of the member(s) shall be listed and the amount for each shown.
5. Expense in Excess of Established Limits. If necessary and desirable expenses exceed any of the limits as specified under Board authorization, a Board member may submit an itemized total to the Board on a regular agenda for action.
6. Reimbursement Request. A request for reimbursement of expenses shall be submitted within 30 days after an expense is incurred using currently adopted reporting forms.
7. Library Director to Monitor Processing and Preparation of Payment. Requests for an advance allowance for prior registration or transportation payment, or for reimbursement of expenses, together with the required accounting, shall be submitted to the Library Director who shall:

   - Check for compliance with all approved regulations.
   - Code and otherwise prepare the request for payment.
   - Forward to the Finance Department for payment.

     All necessary forms and directions shall be available in the Library Office and the Library Director or Executive Secretary shall assist Board members as necessary.

8. Adjustments. Any difference in opinion with respect to the priority or legality of a request by a member of the Board for an allowance or reimbursement shall be referred without delay to the Treasurer of the Library Board for prompt resolution. If a satisfactory resolution is not achieved, the difference of opinion may be submitted by either party to the Board for a determination.

---

Board Policy 032 (Adopted 6-89/Rev. 12-90)

---
[<< 031 Travel by Members of the Board](/policies/000-internal-policies/031.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [033 Business Related Gratuities >>](/policies/000-internal-policies/033.md)
--- | --- | ---
