# 205 General Process for Selection

Selection shall be based on the merits of a work in relation to the needs, interests and demands of the entire Kansas City community. Basic to this policy are the "Library Bill of Rights," the "Freedom to Read Statement," and the "Freedom to View Statement" as adopted by the American Library Association, and to which this library subscribes. (See Appendices section, Appen. 104, Appen. 205)

Materials which some portion of the community may find objectionable shall not be automatically rejected. Selection is made on the basis of whether the item presents life in its true proportions, whether characters and situations are realistically presented, whether the item has literary, artistic, or informational merit, and whether the item is representative of a current trend or genre.

Based on the services it is expected to perform, it is the responsibility of the library to provide circulating, reference, and resource material for the general public. Special collections shall be developed and maintained when indicated by community interest.

---

Board Policy 205 (Adopted 6-84)

---

## 205.01. Specific Principles for Selection

The following principles will be taken into consideration when selecting items to be added to the collection:

1. Contemporary significance or permanent value.
2. Accuracy of content.
3. Authority of the author or producer.
4. Relation of the work to the existing collection.
5. Price, format and ease of use.
6. Availability of information in the subject area.
7. Availability of material elsewhere in the community—holdings of other libraries in the area are considered in developing the Library's collection.
8. Adequate coverage of controversial issues.
9. Response to popular demand, including a representative sampling of experimental or ephemeral material.

---

Administrative Procedure 205.01 (Adopted 6-84)
