# 207 Gifts

A gift for the library collection may consist of materials or funds for the purchase of materials. Funds may be given for acquiring materials recommended by the library staff, or for the purchase of specific items suggested by the donor and recommended by the staff for inclusion. The library encourages gifts not earmarked for specific items to permit the most flexible use of the donation for the enrichment of the collection.

---

Board Policy 207 (Adopted 6-84)

---

## 207.01. Gift Criteria

Gift additions shall meet the same selection criteria as purchased materials. In some cases, titles are received which could not have been acquired from library funds because of budget limitations.

If gifts of marginal value are offered, processing costs and use of shelf space are considered before the gift can be accepted. Any gift accepted by the Library shall be subject to the following conditions:

1. The library retains unconditional ownership of the gift.
2. The library makes the final decision on its own use or other disposition of the gift.
3. The library reserves the right to decide the conditions of display, housing, and access to the materials.

Any offers of substantial worth (i.e., equipment, art objects, special collections, etc.) should be referred to the Library Director. Such offers will be accepted/rejected based on considerations of need, appropriateness, maintenance, precedence, etc. Any gift accepted shall be subject to the conditions of acceptance outlined above.

---

Administrative Procedure 207.01 (Adopted 6-84)

---

## 207.02. Determining Value for Gifts

The library shall not affix a value for income tax purposes to any gift accepted. This is the responsibility of the donor. The library will acknowledge the gift by letter and maintain a file substantiating the type, quantity, condition, etc., of the gift. It is the donor's responsibility to maintain all personal records pertaining to a gift for which s/he is claiming a tax deduction.

---

Administrative Procedure 207.02 (Adopted 6-84/Rev. 11-89)

---
[<< 206 Textbooks](/policies/200-collection-development/206.md) | [Return to All Policies](/policies/) | [208 Collection Maintenance >>](/policies/200-collection-development/208.md)
--- | --- | ---
